Mathematical competences and skills are basic life competences and are crucial for active engagement in all aspects of life. Dynamic and interdisciplinary knowledge and abilities are needed to help people to face unforeseeable problems in real life settings. Maths enables solving real life problems in various disciplines including science and social science (Haylock & Thangata, 2007) and is thus supportive of other basic skills and other curriculum areas.
Traditional maths teaching within the procedural-formalist paradigm has focused on teaching the body of mathematical knowledge using routines and procedures that have no connection to children's experience (Ellis, 2005). The primary focus has been on the procedural knowledge, with less emphasis on conceptual understanding (Crooks & Alibali, 2014). Thus, content-oriented maths curricula have become disconnected from authentic learning contexts which apply maths in real life contexts and within various curricular subjects. In the past, maths education has focussed on teaching students the steps needed to find answers to mathematical problems and it is only after they have mastered the ability to manipulate numbers that they have been introduced to real-life applications for these skills. Since the turn of the century, the shift has been made to integrating conceptual and procedural knowledge (Crooks & Alibali, 2014) which is acquired through learning contextualised in children's lives, providing grounding for process-oriented curricula (Ellis, 2005). In the US, the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) has highlighted learning mathematics for participation in society, incorporating both the understanding of concepts and their integration in life contexts (National Council of Teachers of School Mathematics, 2000). Slovenia has introduced process-oriented curricula structured on the principles of inquiry-based learning and activity-based lessons (Ministry of Education and Sport and National Educational Institute, 2011). The reformed Slovene elementary school maths curriculum which was introduced in 2011/12 focuses on the students' acquisition of process knowledge as higher-order learning outcomes, facilitating the autonomy of teachers to design learning outcomes and content in their classroom practice connecting maths knowledge with knowledge in other subjects (Ministry of Education and Sport and National Educational Institute, 2011). These curricula incorporate concrete manipulatives and computer software, which help to develop mathematical ideas in meaningful contexts (Billstein & Williamson, 2008) and place great importance on the student's ability to engage in mathematics mentally, with symbols, graphics or using physical materials and objects (Principles and Standards for School Mathematics, 2000). The inclusion of computer assisted learning is in accordance with the recommendations of the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Standards (TIMSS) and Program for International Students Assessment (PISA) (Mullis et al., 2012, OECD, 2003) international studies. Various studies and teachers' associations report the need for computer assisted learning for learning concepts in depth (Association of Mathematics Teacher Educators (AMTE), 2006, Mullis et al., 2012, National Science Teachers Association (NSTA), 2008, Principles and Standards for School Mathematics, 2000), and the individualisation of learning coupled with increasing interest and motivation for learning mathematics (Mullis et al., 2012).
Among the priorities when integrating technology in teaching and learning is the longstanding need to nurture students' achievement of higher-order learning outcomes (Jonassen & Reeves, 1996). The effect of computer-mediated learning in this area is not clear. Cheung and Slavin's (2013) meta-analysis indicates a modest positive effect of educational technology in enhancing academic performance in maths and the need for further educational technology development to harness its power for learning mathematics. Reed, Drijvers, & Kirschner's (2010) review of studies related to computer application to maths higher-order learning outcomes and motivation for learning maths concluded, however, that the effects were disappointing. Roschelle et al. (2010) indicate that technology should not be considered as separate from the curriculum and that research questions should be built on its pedagogical use and not by isolating the technology from the curriculum. They argue that the intervention must be examined as a fundamentally integrated system which would lose its integrity if the technology was studied in isolation (Roschelle et al., 2010). Similarly, Schmid et al. (2014) also argue for forming the research problem on the pedagogical issue of instructional design and learning goals. Cheung and Slavin's (2013) meta-analysis highlights the relationship between educational technology, curricular contents and instructional methods and indicates that the technology cannot be separated from the curriculum since the unique contribution of technology is not the topic of investigation.
Over the last decade, researchers have become interested in the affordance of tablets in the learning process and its effects on students' achievements. Studies on the affective domain of learning have demonstrated that tablets contribute to engagement and sustain students' interest (Furió et al., 2015, Hu and Garimella, 2014, Zydney and Warner, 2016). Students also indicate preferences for learning with tablets rather than text-books (Carr, 2012). With regard to the social domain of learning, the portability of tablets allows students to move around in a classroom, communicating in groups (Alvarez, Brown, & Nussbaum, 2011). Touch screens support interaction of two or more students at the same time (Ingram, Williamson-Leadley, & Pratt, 2016), and students can make visible and share their conceptual understanding and reflection by recording their thinking aloud while solving tasks (Ingram et al., 2016). In addition, tablet-based small-group face-to-face collaboration for problem solving facilitates engagement for all students in the classroom (Nussbaum, Alvarez, McFarlane, Claro, & Radovic, 2009). Zydney and Warner (2016), however, report a lack of research within the cognitive domain regarding tablets' integration and their effects on higher-order cognitive outcomes and problem-solving capabilities, while Coffland and Xie (2015) report a lack of maths apps developed in connection with other curriculum areas.
1.1. Higher-order learning outcomes and tablet integrationHigher-order learning outcomes refer to students' ability to perform complex thinking and are connected with process knowledge which is developed for students in the context of authentic situations and activities which they thus find meaningful. This study examines tablets' affordance for learning in meaningful contexts within cross-curricular situations.We begin by defining higher-order learning outcomes and discussing related studies examining computer-based and tablet-based learning with regard to maths learning achievements and authentic student activities which support higher-order achievements. By “authentic” we mean activities that are meaningful to students because they incorporate real life situations, cross-curricular connections and students' social practices. Authentic learning contexts also follow students' developmental levels in terms of connecting domains of learning and their alignment with tablets' ergonomics. This last is examined in detail in section 1.2.A number of authors have made significant contributions to the development of the concept of higher order learning outcomes. In particular Krathwohl (2002) revised Bloom's taxonomy of learning outcomes to chart how teaching occurs in both the knowledge and cognitive process dimensions, with the four sub-dimensions of knowledge being factual, conceptual, procedural and metacognitive. In maths, it is not possible to separate procedural and conceptual knowledge although it is useful to distinguish between them for knowledge development (Rittle-Johnson & Schneider, 2015). Based on Gagné’s intellectual skills, we considered three levels of maths knowledge: first, concept knowledge; second, procedural knowledge; and third, problem-solving knowledge (Kapp, 2007). Conceptual knowledge is defined by Kilpatrick, Swaford and Findel as “comprehension of math concepts, operations and relations” (2001, p. 5 as cited in Rittle-Johnson & Schneider, 2015). Crooks and Alibali (2014) define it as connection knowledge, general principle knowledge, knowledge of principles underlining procedures, category knowledge, symbol knowledge and domain structure knowledge. Procedural knowledge in maths requires a series of actions to accomplish the goal (Rittle-Johnson & Schneider, 2015), incorporating both routine or instrumental procedural knowledge and higher-order cognitive outcomes or complex procedural knowledge (Long, 2005). Problem-solving abilities integrate both the conceptual and procedural dimensions, and Jonassen (1997) points out that problem solving knowledge is regarded as the most important learning outcome. Building on Gagné's (1985) work, Gagné, Briggs, and Wagner (1992, p. 55) discussed the intellectual skills involved in problem solving: discrimination, concrete concepts, rule using and development of higher order rules. According to Gagné, problem solving is a high-order thinking skill (Foshay & Kirkley, 2003).People conduct the problem solving process within a representational system and the problem solving process depends on internal development of conceptual structures of mathematical understanding (Goldin, 1998). To support the development of concepts, procedures and problem-solving knowledge, learning tasks should give students the opportunity to apply combinations of representations and a diversity of representations at the concrete, visual and abstract levels in learning, and also to transit between representations. Goldin (1998) argues that learners need scaffolding for external and internal representations. As he maintains, representations have intrinsic and extrinsic relations providing different semantic interpretations of a meaning (Goldin, 1998, pp. 144) when interpreting and translating the meaning of external representations (for example on a computer and on paper or an object) into internal and vice versa. Goldin (1998) argues that maths problem solving requires an affective representational system that refers to the emotional state or attitude which is relevant in problem solving and which also involves the emotional domain of learning outcomes.The TIMSS report for 2011 provides evidence supporting integrating technology for concept development in depth, for tailoring instruction for students' individual needs and for engaging students' interest (Mullis et al., 2012). Cheung and Slavin's (2013) meta-analysis of studies examining the integration of computer assisted learning on students' achievements indicated positive effects with modest effect size. Haβler, Major and Hennessy's (2016) review of tablet-based learning in elementary and secondary schools examined tablets' affordance for learning outcomes. Referring to tablets' impacts on learning outcomes, they identified sixteen studies with positive learning outcomes, five showing no differences and two with negative learning outcomes. There are also mixed findings about what effect mobile learning for maths has on learning outcomes. Carr (2012) reported no significant difference in the fifth grade maths curriculum between the experimental group using iPads and a control group working without iPads. Zhang (2015) examined online maths apps games and found that American fourth grade students spend extensive time on maths-based game web sites with no effect on their maths performance. She claimed that there is little evidence that online maths games meet criteria for quality learning and identifies a significant negative correlation between time spent on online math-games search and academic maths achievements of fourth grade students in 50 states in the USA.Some studies, utilising an experiment design applying tablet based learning in an experimental group and a control group using traditional manipulatives, report positive effects of tablet integration on maths performance in terms of problem solving (Kiger, Herro, & Prunty, 2012) and conceptual knowledge (Schacter and Jo, 2016, Schacter et al., 2015) and students' problem solving in natural sciences (Hwang, Wu, & Ke, 2011). Zhang, Trussel, Gallegos, and Asam (2015) conducted a study with a pre- and post-participation tests in one group of students examining the effect of tablet on math problem solving. They examined apps in terms of providing self-pacing, immediate feedback and structuring complex problems to support struggling students in fourth grade. The findings indicated that for those students tablets could provide higher levels of personalisation and support. Daher's (2009) study of mobile maths learning showed that students perceived that mobile learning made mathematics easier and faster, enabling students to visualise mathematical problems and to solve problems in a shorter time and much more precisely. Hwang et al. (2011) point out that the contextualisation of digital learning space with real world integrating tools and provision of feedback during mobile learning improves learning achievements. For more comprehensive evaluation, an in depth study of the learning process is needed in order to identify the effects on students' knowledge and how mobile learning affects the organisation of instruction with regard to teaching approaches and subject areas (Kiger et al., 2012).Tablet use in schools facilitates more cross-curricular work and more multi-disciplinary topic types of activity (Sheehy et al., 2005). Coffland and Xie (2015) discussed tablets' affordance for overcoming decontextualised maths teaching, where maths is divorced from real life problems and contents of other curricular subjects. Tablets can provide contextualisation in real life and in other curricular subjects due to tablets' affordance for multiple representations, connecting data from different disciplines and usability in situations outside the classroom. Lazakidou and Retalis (2010) also examined computer supported collaborative maths problem solving in cross-curricular contextualised activities. This instruction provided a meaningful context for students within real life problems and curriculum subjects (Mullis et al., 2012, OECD, 2003). The problem with traditional single-subject teaching is that it results in day to day work with large amounts of data which are not linked into a coherent whole, leading to fragmented learning (Jacobs, 1989). Such an accumulation of knowledge results in short-term retention only and in most cases students cannot apply it in everyday situations. Through a cross-curricular or interdisciplinary approach, teachers can integrate information, techniques, tools, perspectives, concepts or theories from two or more disciplines to explain phenomena or solve problems, in ways that would have been unlikely through single disciplinary means (Boix Mansilla, 2010). Interdisciplinary learning is thus “defined by the integration of multidisciplinary knowledge across a central program, theme or focus” (Ivanitskaya, Clark, Montgomery, & Primeau, 2002, pp. 95). To implement interdisciplinary learning, Fogarty (2009) identified three models of integration: within disciplines (intradisciplinary): across several disciplines (interdisciplinary): and inside the mind of the learner (transdisciplinary). Interdisciplinary learning fosters a problem-focused integration of information consistent with more complex knowledge structures to a higher degree than traditional single subject approaches (Ivanitskaya et al., 2002), resulting in more durable and useful knowledge.
1.2. The affordance of tablets and their ergonomic characteristics in terms of Bruner's three stage process and domains of learningFundamentally, the planning of maths instruction requires focus on the three domains of learning: cognitive, affective-social and psychomotor. Generally, up to seven years of age, students are at the preoperational stage and from seven to eleven at the concrete stage, when their reasoning and manipulation connects with concrete representations (Piaget, 1952). Following the Bruner three-stage learning model, learning activities should be designed following a concrete-visual-abstract sequencing of instruction, starting with the concrete and passing through visual to abstract representations and transiting between them. This begins with the enactive stage where children manipulate concrete materials or objects and moves through the iconic stage, where children deal with mental images of objects, to the symbolic stage where children manipulate symbols rather than images or objects directly (Bruner, 1966).The use of technology in early learning is a controversial issue as it needs to address the requirements of developmental-appropriate curriculum that help to bridge young children's experiences at home and in school (Hsin, Li, & Tsai, 2014). Hsin et al. conducted a review of studies of the technology use in early learning with respect to developmental impact on the affective-social, psychomotor and cognitive domains. They found that treatments tailored according to developmental needs achieved positive impacts. They also found that using manipulation of concrete objects to learn abstract concepts in science and maths produced positive impacts in the cognitive domain, while the use of technology for interaction and collaboration produced positive impacts in the social domain of learning.This paper focusses on the introduction of cross-curricular tablets-based classroom instruction using Bruner's three stage learning framework and on the entry of tablets into the instruction within a process-outcome strategy aiming at the cognitive, psychomotor and affective-social domains of learning outcomes. This paper looks at how the ergonomics of children's tablet use facilitate the transitions between concrete, visual and abstract representations as required by Bruner's model. The key affordances provided by tablets in this situation are portability, touch interaction and intuitive use providing multisensory engagement at the visual, tactile, auditory and kinaesthetic levels. The cognitive, affective-social and psychomotor domains of learning inform the analysis of child's computer work within cognitive, physical and organisational ergonomics. This paper discusses how the ergonomics of children's computer use relate to and enhance learning in the physical, cognitive and organisational domains. Physical ergonomics engages with physical activity, involving anatomical, anthropological and psychological characteristics. Cognitive ergonomics deals with mental processes affecting interaction and how processes are affected by interaction with tools. Organisational ergonomics is concerned with socio-technical systems with regard to processes (Karwowski, 2005).The physical ergonomics of computer use in schools or at home is concerned with factors associated with workstation, laptop or note book installation (position of monitor, keyboard and mouse) and child body size (Breen, Pyper, Rusk, & Dockrell, 2007). Computer use brings more physically constraining work into school children's lives (Linton, Hellsing, Halme, & Akerstedt, 1994) affecting children's physical and bone development and potentially causing computer related musculoskeletal disorders. Physical developmental guidelines include facilitation of mixed activities combining sedentary and whole body movement learning activities in order to avoid potential disorders (Straker, Maslen, Burgess-Limerick, Johnson, & Dennerlein, 2010). Unlike a desktop computer with vertical screen, keyboard and mouse, tablets allow whole body movement in the classroom (Alvarez et al., 2011). This is an essential aspect for early learning as well as enabling the possibility of less sedentary learning in later years (Straker et al., 2010). Tablets in the classroom make possible modalities of child-computer interaction which are not available in traditional human-computer interaction; for example, touch, gesture and movement (Antle, 2013). Tablets with touch interaction allow for manipulation that is very similar to how children manipulate physical objects (Blackwell, Lauricella, & Wartella, 2016), thus exploiting their natural sensomotor form of interaction (Price, Jewitt, & Crescenzi, 2015). The tablet eliminates the need for more complex hand-eye coordination typically inherent in working with a keyboard and mouse (Blackwell et al., 2016, Cooper, 2005). Stylus or pen input with a touch screen also facilitates hand writing skills for students with writing difficulties (Sheehy et al., 2005).In the past, keyboard and mouse were the interfaces that children needed to master in order to be able to use a computer. In their use, a point-and-click action is much easier for children to perform than a drag-and-drop action (Donker and Reitsma, 2007, Inkpen, 2001). Touch-based technology has resulted in two other gestures currently dominating children's applications, namely one-finger tap and one-finger drag and drop (Nacher et al., 2015, Vatavu et al., 2015). There are, however, limitations to touch-based technologies in children's interaction (Anthony et al., 2012, Anthony et al., 2014, Vatavu et al., 2015). In particular, for 7-11 year-olds the targets need to be sufficiently large to minimise misses (Anthony et al., 2014, Vatavu et al., 2015) although the size of the touch screen is reported not to be a significant factor in acquired knowledge, engagement, satisfaction, ease of use, etc (Furió, González-Gancedo, Carmen Juan, Seguí, & Costa, 2013). Researchers report that children's movements on a touch-screen become more consistent and reliable by the age of 12 (Anthony et al., 2014).Cognitive ergonomics focuses on computer visualisation and simulation affordance, with human computer multisensory interaction providing interactive manipulatives similar to interaction with physical manipulatives. Interactive manipulatives provide the possibility for both concrete and visual manipulation of virtual representations. Familiarity with the technology is crucial for better concentration on the task by freeing memory resources by using automated skills (Oviatt, 2013). When a child can use a tablet intuitively without the need for complex instructions, the focus can be on the learning activity. This relates especially to human-computer interfaces, which have significant influence on human cognition, problem-solving and reasoning (Furió et al., 2013, Oviatt, 2013). Digital media apply physical, material and social affordance of modes and present different communicational and representational potentials in the learning process (Jewitt, 2008). The dynamic interactive multimodal representations and the multisensory application of tablets support knowledge development by providing multiple representations which support students' expression and facilitate engagement (CAST, 2012).Organisational ergonomics in the past focused on single station/laptop/notebook use or on the computer classroom. With tablets, a variety of environments and organisational modes are possible. Tablet computers make the management of classroom space much easier. Mercier, Higgins, and Joyce-Gibbons (2014) and Sheehy et al. (2005) examine the impact of mobile technology and tablets on the physical arrangement of classrooms, and its impact on instructional design and learning activities. In contrast to presentations projected on a central whiteboard (single display), tablets enable sharing of information either on large shared multi-touch displays (class viewing) or on personal mobile devices (multi display).Organising instruction and instructional design needs to take into consideration the cognitive, psychomotor and affective domains of learning. Physical and cognitive ergonomics were addressed above and the affective domain of learning will be discussed now. The affective domain refers to feelings and emotions during learning which could hinder or enhance learning. Bloom's taxonomy for affective domain refers to emotions, attitudes, values. It consists of categories: receiving, responding, valuing, organising and internalising in the processes of engagement, motivation, attention, acceptance, commitment, appreciation and enthusiasm (Bloom, Engelhart, Furst, Hil, & Krathwohl, 1956).Digital technology redefines the boundaries between in school and out-of-school activity. Jewitt (2008) discussed the trajectories of students, teachers and knowledge from the physical, social, emotional and cognitive aspects. The Ofcom Report (2014) stated that in 2014 one in three children between five and 15 years in Great Britain had his or her own tablet, the number having doubled in one year. Wartella, Rideout, Lauricella, and Connell (2013) reported that in the USA the average amount of time that children under eight years spend interacting with mobile devices tripled between 2011 and 2013. However, while the studies found that computer use at school and at home enhance students' mathematical achievements (OECD, 2003) they also indicate extensive computer use as risky behaviour (OECD, 2015).Mobile technology is transforming social practices and facilitates learning embedded in them. Mobile devices are rapidly absorbed into learning and, for school life, tablets are absorbed more rapidly than others (Merchant, 2012) capitalising on the students' social practices and authentic activities. The feelings and emotions coming from their free time computer practices could increase motivation for learning and academic achievement (Sheehy et al., 2005). It fosters high levels of immersion in subject matter, active learning and more student centred learning (Johnson, Adams, & Cummins, 2012), connecting school and homework (Sheehy et al., 2005) and classroom integration of popular practices like mobile gaming (Facer et al., 2004).Tablet based learning facilitates cross-curricular teaching, providing multiple representations, connecting data from different disciplines, and with usability outside classrooms (Coffland & Xie, 2015). Tablet-based learning also provides affordance in the three domains of learning. It has benefits in the affective domain in that it facilitate students' engagement in learning maths (Zhang et al., 2015) and sustain students' interest (Hu & Garimella, 2014). It contributes to the social domain because its portability facilitates cross-curricular teaching by providing space for collaboration (Nussbaum et al., 2009).
1.3. The context of the studyThe Slovenian elementary school system is still oriented towards disciplinary teaching, with curricula and textbooks written for each subject separately. The reformed curriculum allows teachers more autonomy for cross-curricular teaching than has previously been the case, providing that teachers ensure that they capture and treat all the content contained in the outcomes of each subject (Ministry of Education and Sport and National Educational Institute, 2011). Cross-curricular teaching is substantively, temporally and organisationally much more complex than traditional separate-subject teaching. Tablet based learning facilitates cross-curricular teaching (Sheehy et al., 2005) and overcoming decontextualised maths teaching providing connection of maths with other curriculum subjects (Coffland & Xie, 2015) and flexible access to learning resources from different curricular subjects. In the Slovenian curriculum, ICT is mentioned in all curriculum areas as an optional set of digital skills which teachers may include in their teaching if they wish. (Ministry of Education and Sport and National Educational Institute, 2011).The current study integrated tablet-based cross-curricular teaching and was motivated by the lack of research about the effectiveness of tablet-based learning for higher-order learning outcomes (Zydney & Warner, 2016), a lack of studies examining maths teaching in cross-curricular connections (Coffland & Xie, 2015) and a lack of studies examining tablets' integration according to Bruner's (1966) three stages of learning and how the stages connect to tablets' ergonomics. This study focuses particularly on the affordance of tablets in terms of mobility and touch interaction that allows manipulation similar to manipulation of physical objects (Blackwell et al., 2016), facilitating children's natural sensomotor interaction (Price et al., 2015) and eliminating the need for more the complex hand-eye coordination typically inherent in working with a keyboard and mouse (Blackwell et al., 2016, Cooper, 2005).The research was conducted in the third grade of elementary school teaching, incorporating process-outcome teaching strategies with tablet-based cross-curricular integration for higher-order learning outcomes. We used tablet-based cross-curricular maths to examine how the students' conceptual, procedural and problem-solving knowledge is supported, answering the three research questions:(1)What effect does using tablet-based cross-curricular maths learning (EG) have on third grade students' conceptual knowledge, procedural knowledge, problem-solving knowledge and ability to solve test tasks when compared with the ability in these areas of children taught maths as a discrete subject using traditional methods and without technology integration (CG)?(2)How does tablets' ergonomic characteristics support the learning outcomes in the cognitive, affective-social and psychomotor domains?(3)How does tablets' ergonomic characteristics support learning by the transition between the Bruner's (1966) three stages at concrete, visual and abstract levels?
1.4. Instructional designWe selected tablets for several reasons, not just because they have been identified as a mean for cross-curricular resourcing. First, not all students own smart phones and schools have access to tablets but not to smart phones. Second, recently tablets have become popular because they are cheaper than smartphones with similar specifications. Third, while the lighter weight and smaller size of smartphones might have made them easier for eight-year-olds to handle, tablets' larger screen size helps when preparing educational content and also facilitates touch-screen manipulation in collaboration tasks and for children with developing fine motor skills.Eight year old students are at the concrete operational stage when they connect reasoning and manipulation with concrete objects and events (Bruner, 1966). The apps included the game based characteristic of rewarding success, but their design uses maths tasks of manipulation of objects while engaging in maths activities. Students used a touch screen with one-finger drag and drop to set the time on a clock (Fig. 3), to locate an object on a grid (Fig. 4) and to create a map (Fig. 5). Tablets provide space for interactive manipulation on the concrete, visual and abstract levels within the cognitive and psychomotor domain aspects of learning. The interactive manipulations applied in this study provided the central focus of the instruction, supported by traditional resources (eg. manipulatives). The authors therefore argue for the introduction of tablets in schools because their multi-sensory human-computer touch interaction provides interactive manipulatives supporting transition between representations on the concrete, visual and abstract level.We selected the learning topics Time and Orientation to integrate maths, natural sciences and the Slovene language. In order to support development of concepts, procedures and problem-solving knowledge, the learning tasks gave students the opportunity to apply combinations of representations and a diversity of representations at the concrete, visual and abstract levels in learning as well as transiting between representations.The instructional design consisted of two parts, and during the experiment, all classes in the EG and CG had two teachers present during lessons, the regular classroom teacher and a teacher from the research project team. All classroom teachers who participated were given lesson plans and the same instructions. Teachers in EG were all introduced to tablets' apps. The EG addressed learning outcomes within the tablet-based cross-curricular lessons. The CG addressed learning outcomes within discrete curricular subject lessons and used traditional pen and pencil technology. In both groups the instruction combined individual, collaborative and ‘chalk and talk’ teaching (albeit on screen or whiteboard) applying the three stage learning model. The assessment on a post-test was designed to include the maths learning outcomes of both EG and CG. In the EG acquired knowledge, content and achieved outcomes related to the themes of orientation and time in tablet-based instruction and were integrated in a cross-curricular connection with a concentrated time frame. As well as tablets they also used traditional manipulatives. The orchestration of tablet-based instruction with traditional resources (Díaz et al., 2015, Nussbaum and Díaz, 2013) in the EG was examined in this study by cross-curricular contextualisation of maths and contextualisation of the learning process through learning activities connecting three stage representations. The EG covered cross-curricular topics following a detailed lesson plan for conducting the activities which were set for every topic. The lessons involved a total of twelve hours spread over half the school year (seven months). Thus we ensured that all the students in the six EG classes received the same intervention. Along with the tablet computers, different actual and visual materials were used for teaching as shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2. After the completion of the experiment, which included tablet-based cross curricular learning, students returned to lessons within discrete curricular subjects.Download : Download high-res image (451KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Addressing the topic of Time through different levels of representation in tablet-based cross-curricular classroom practice.A Legend: CR: concrete representation, VR: visual representation, AR: abstract representation.Download : Download high-res image (424KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The interplay between different representations for the curriculum content related to the topic Orientation on the grid and the map in tablet-based cross-curricular classroom practice.A Legend: CR: concrete representation, VR: visual representation, AR: abstract representation.Download : Download high-res image (188KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Clock app.Download : Download high-res image (153KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. Grid app.Download : Download high-res image (581KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 5. Map app.The teachers in the CG were also given detailed lesson plans which devoted the same number of hours to discussing all the topics with the students, but divided into discrete discipline areas. Students in the CG acquired the same content and achieved the same outcomes within discrete curricular lessons with no integrated curricular connection, nor within a concentrated timeframe. They used only traditional manipulatives. In the cross-curricular teaching in the EG the contents and outcomes of mathematics, Slovene language and natural science were combined. The CG covered the same contents and outcomes which were undertaken as transversal sections, discussed in the classroom, but as discrete topics and at different times as set down in the national curricular (e.g. names of the months are a topic in natural science in September, while time is a topic within the maths curriculum in December). Thus, while the same material was covered in both groups, related material within different subject areas was usually not covered concurrently by the CG students.The main objective of the cross-curricular theme “Time” was that students understand the concept of time. The following outcomes were dealt with as integrated lessons in the EG and within discrete subjects in the CG:-Maths: Students know the time units (year, month and day) and the relationships between them.-Natural science: Students are able to describe the time course of events, read analogue and digital clocks, and divide the day into hours and minutes.-Slovene language: Students have the relevant vocabulary to express the concepts learned.The main objective of the cross-curricular Orientation theme was that students orient themselves using a map and within a coordinate grid. Orientation on the grid is a precondition for a successful orientation on the map (objective of the topic Orientation). Umek (2001) recommends reading a grid by following these steps: correctly reading the coordinates from the coordinate axes, finding coordinates on a grid, construction of horizontal and vertical axes and finding the intersection. Therefore, the first app used was a grid, and then students identified the elements of an aerial photo, followed by orientation on the map as an authentic situation (Umek, 2001). The following outcomes were again dealt with as integrated lessons in the EG and within discrete subjects in the CG.-Maths: Students can read a variety of plans, navigate through them and create user instructions for movement around the room.-Natural science: Students are able to use different types of sketches and maps.-Slovene language: Students observe the objects in the picture and ask about and describe their position. They use the correct interrogative adverbs and express their position with a proper proposal.Orientation is part of the learning outcomes of several different subjects dealt with from pre-school onwards. The cross-curricular themes combined outcomes of different subjects and dealt with them comprehensively, so that students obtain related skills that will be useful in everyday life, such as being able to orientate themselves with the help of a map. Cross-curricular tasks provide meaningful contexts within different curricular subjects when developing conceptual, procedural and problem-solving knowledge (Istenic Starcic, Cotic, Solomonides, & Volk, 2016).Traditional learning uses concrete and visual manipulatives in combination with paper and pen activities. The transition between representations requires different representational resources and combinations. In order to provide cross-curricular tablet-based learning, the researchers designed three apps on an Android platform in the Slovene language, using teachers' instructional design.The tablet apps, with multisensory human interaction, allow manipulation with interactive manipulatives of multiple representations, providing a combination of representations when manipulating on a touch screen (concrete level) with visual objects (analogue/digital clock; grid and map) supporting abstract representations. The abstract level for the Time app involves transforming between digital and analogue time when manipulating a visual representation of a clock. The abstract level for the Orientation app involves a child drawing on the map while deciding where to put the requested data.Fig. 1, Fig. 2 present the structure of lessons following a concrete-visual-abstract representation sequencing for the topics Time and Orientation. Fig. 1 shows how the topic of Time was addressed through different levels of representation in the EG. Initially, the topic was introduced to students through actual representations including riddles, different calendars and various time-measuring devices. The transition between concrete and visual representations is represented by statistical content, by means of creating and interpreting a histogram displaying months of birth, as well as by introducing the recognition and reading of time on clocks with hands. By means of different visual representations, the students become familiar with the history of time measurement. Students then read and interpreted a TV programme, which is on the border between visual and abstract when it comes to representations, as the students have to imagine the time sequence that they see on TV. To make a connection between all three levels of representations, the students use an app on the tablet to set the hands on the clock – this is defined as a concrete visual representation, whereas at the same time, they also have to translate the digital reading into the analogue one at an abstract level. With all the concrete and visual representations, the students could acquire the concept of time through their own experience.As an example we present a description of cross-curricular tasks for the topic Time. Students first listed the calendar names of months and days of the week. Next, they found data about the month of their own birth on the calendar, and also learned the historical names of the months. From reading the calendar students went to smaller units of time – hours and minutes. First, they learned about the history of time measurement and about old devices for measuring time. Then they developed, through a variety of activities, a feeling for the duration both of one minute and of one second and after all these activities they learned about clocks and reading time. After this final step students started to use the Clock app. This topic covers the content and outcomes of three school subject (maths, Slovene language and natural science). Maths has a supporting role in the interdisciplinary connection, but with the help of content and on the basis of the outcomes of the Slovene language and natural science, students learn about the set of time measurement in a multifaceted, comprehensive manner. In contrast, in the CG, students only learned about the relationship between hour and minute and how to read the time in maths. They learned about other aspects of the concept of time at different times of the school year, thus making it more difficult to understand the maths topics in the context of the development of the concept of time.In Fig. 2, we see the interplay between different representations for the curriculum content related to Orientation. By means of social games and orientation with movement students revised the basic concepts related to orientation at a concrete level, after which they answered questions about the location of an object that they had hidden, which is an activity used to improve their logical thinking. Presenting students with different concrete grids, inside which they had to orientate themselves and create a simple map using the given coordinates, enabled them to make the transition between concrete and visual representation. At the visual level, different presentations helped them learn how maps are created. Following this, students had to draw a simplified version of a map into the grid, using the agreed symbols, which required a transition from visual to symbolic representations. To enable the combination of all three levels of representations, we worked with two tablet apps. With the first app, the students had to complete a grid according to the instructions given. With the second and more demanding one, they had to create a map on the basis of an aerial photo. The students drew on the aerial photo with their fingers, which involve both concrete and visual representations, whereas the final product was an abstract representation of the surface in the form of a map. Through all these activities, the students learned how to orientate themselves using a map with coordinates. If the topic of grid had only been discussed from mathematical point of view, they would just have learned about the position of objects on the grid. In the cross-disciplinary discussion, they were not simply reading the grid but also reading geographical elements on the map. The final outcome was orientation on the map.Hypotheses to answer research question 1. For answers to the second and the third research questions, researchers observed the experimental group.General hypothesis: Students who receive tablet-based cross-curricular lessons will achieve statistically significant higher test scores when solving tasks that require procedural and problem-solving knowledge compared with students who receive traditional discrete subject maths lessons.H1There will be no statistically significant differences on the level of basic and conceptual knowledge between the experimental and the control group (1st level).H2The experimental group will be more successful than the control group in solving tasks at the level of procedural knowledge (2nd level).H3The experimental group will be more successful than the control group in solving tasks at the level of problem-solving knowledge (3rd level).
