Imbalanced data is one of the most prevalent challenges in machine learning [1], [2]. In a plethora of real-world applications, some observations are more likely to appear than others but at the same time less frequent observations are often considered as the more valuable ones. One of the first fields that noticed a high presence of imbalanced datasets was medicine. There is a significant disproportion between healthy and sick patients and diseases vary in their likeliness to appear. This causes a difficulty when analyzing such datasets as most of machine learning models work under an assumption that classes are roughly balanced. If this assumption is violated, the resulting model develops a bias towards the majority class. This reduces the generalization capabilities of the classifier and makes it unfeasible for the minority class.
There have been a plethora of algorithms developed for alleviating the class imbalance problem and usually focus on data preprocessing or model adaptation. In the former case, training dataset is balanced with a dedicated resampling approach that either reduces the size of majority class or increases the size of minority class (or both in some cases). This balances the training set, removing the bias. Latter methods focus on modifying the used classifier in order to make its learning mechanism skew-insensitive. While effective, such modifications are specific only to a given type of classifier, making it less flexible than resampling.
Binary imbalanced problems, with well-defined minority and majority classes, are most commonly considered in the literature. However, many real-world problems are characterized by more than two classes, while still being affected by skewed distributions. Multi-class imbalanced data is a much more difficult scenario and poses unique challenges. Class roles are no longer well-defined - a single class can be a majority with respect to some classes and minority to others. This calls for designing native multi-class solutions, as simple binary decomposition leads to a loss of information and oversimplification of the classification task. Recent trends point out to a need for a deeper analysis of properties of each class and instances [3]. Gaining the understanding of what specifically causes learning difficulties for each class may lead to more fine-tuned and effective solutions [2], [3].
While imbalanced problems originated from small-scale datasets, the recent advent of big data significantly affected this domain [4]. Researchers need to deal with the ever-growing size, complexity, and often non-stationary nature of modern datasets that are still plagued by skewed class distributions [5], [6]. As the size of data makes usage of standard computers unfeasible, we observed a rise of high-performance computing platforms, such as GPUs [7] and clusters [4]. Their specific nature calls not only for customized implementations of existing algorithms for tackling imbalanced data, but even for developing completely new techniques that can take advantage of these computing environments [1]. In the big data context the predominance of methods for binary problems is even more visible, as learning from multi-class imbalanced data is still unexplored [2].
Research goal. To propose the first holistic framework for learning from multi-class imbalanced big data on Spark architecture.
Motivation. Big data problems are commonly characterized by multi-class nature, as well as skewed distributions [1]. This requires dedicated algorithms for multi-class imbalanced data that use much more information about relationships among classes than their binary counterparts [2]. Existing state-of-the-art solutions are designed for small problem and are not capable of processing millions of instances in an effective manner [2]. This calls for developing efficient algorithms for handling multi-class imbalanced big data that can harness the power of high-performance computing environments. Furthermore, there is a need for creating methods that can analyze the unique properties and characteristics of each minority class, allowing us to truly understand what causes the learning difficulty in skewed big data problems.
Summary of paper. We propose the first complete framework for learning from big and imbalanced multi-class data. We propose to analyze and understand the characteristics of multi-class imbalanced datasets by analyzing the instance-level difficulties that are present in each class. This allows us to identify learning challenges that are posed by each distribution. This information is embedded into our proposed informative resampling methods that focus on the most challenging instances. It allows us to preserve and enhance unique properties of each class, while balancing classes with native multi-class solutions. We have implemented various resampling techniques and evaluation methodologies on Apache Spark in order to facilitate learning from massive data collections in a high-performance computing environment. Furthermore, we propose a novel modification of SMOTE that is dedicated to MapReduce environments and alleviates the existing issues with spatial incoherence of instances in computing nodes.
Main contributions. This works addresses the discussed challenges in learning from imbalanced big data with the following research contributions:

•Framework for multi-class imbalanced big data: we introduce the first complete framework for learning from multi-class imbalanced big data that cohesively addresses data-level understanding, class balancing, classifier learning and model evaluation.•Informative multi-class resampling methods: we propose a methodology for analyzing the instance-level difficulties embedded in each class and analyzing their properties to facilitate understanding of imbalanced data phenomenon and leveraging resampling procedures with enriched information.•SMOTE modification for MapReduce: we address the recently observed difficulties with SMOTE on MapReduce environments [1], [4] by forcing spatial coherence among oversampled instances in each class.•Code and dataset repository: we offer a public repository of datasets and code that can be easily used by other researchers to advance the works in the field of imbalanced big data learning.1 
The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows: Section 2 gives an overview of the imbalanced domain, Section 3 presents details of the proposed resampling framework, Section 4 discusses the analysis of classes and instances in multi-class big problems, Section 5 presents the modified SMOTE for MapReduce, Section 6 depicts experimental study, Section 7 discusses obtained insights, while Section 8 concludes the paper.
