The Hartree-Fock method is a well-known method of approximation for the treatment of the quantum many-body problem, applied nowadays to a plethora of different domains such as atomic, solid-state, and nuclear physics, quantum chemistry, and nanostructures. It was developed by two physicists, the Briton Douglas Rayner Hartree (1897–1958) and the Soviet Vladimir Fock (1898–1974). This process occurred in two stages, with works published in 1928 (Hartree (1928a), Hartree (1928b), Hartree (1928c), Hartree (1929)) and in 1930 (Fock, 1930). The method quickly proved to be the most adequate for many-body problems and later became the starting point of most techniques for describing atoms and molecules. Notably, from the mid-1950s onwards, it played a tremendous role in quantum chemistry. This was deeply connected to the development of digital computers,1 which greatly facilitated calculations. Thus, since the Hartree-Fock method is known for leading to tedious computations, there is a tendency to view the years 1930 to 1950 as years of stagnation before its extensive use.
Nevertheless, the present paper emphasizes different aspects of the history of the Hartree-Fock method, and shows that the view that it all started with computers is only true to a certain extent. Already in the 1930s, the method, as presented by Fock, was the object of several considerations related to its mathematical formulation, possible extension, and conceptual understanding. To highlight them, we will mostly focus on Hartree and Fock. Not only because they played a central role as founders of the method, but also because they participated in its application in the 1930s and remained deeply connected with its further extensions.
The present study also helps us to extend some considerations developed in a recent article by James & Joas (2015), Jordan (1927) in which the authors emphasize the role of applications in establishing quantum mechanics and argue against the common tendency to put forth rather theoretical works. In particular, they insist on the period 1926–1928 where a number of applications participated in clarifying the unity, generality, and physical meaning of quantum mechanics. The Hartree-Fock method is, in our sense, another remarkable case study, which can be extended over a longer period. Its application pushed physicists not only to question the mathematical formulation of the quantum many-body problem, but also some of its physical consequences. Moreover, we intend to partially fill a gap in historiography, as specific studies of the Hartree-Fock method are missing so far.2
The present article proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the elaboration of the Hartree-Fock method, with a special focus on Fock׳s contribution. Section 3 discusses mathematical and computational difficulties related to its early reception. Section 4 presents the different contributions of Hartree and Fock to the method during the 1930s. Section 5 then emphasizes conceptual issues concerning the quantum exchange phenomena and their reception by the two aforementioned actors. Finally, Section 6, in summarizing the situation of the Hartree-Fock method at the beginning of the 1950s, underlines the role played earlier by solid-state physicists in clarifying its conceptual understanding, but also places it in the larger dynamics of quantum chemistry at the dawn of the computer era.
