Self-managing health often places heavy demands on patients, including understanding the risks and benefits of different treatments, test results, and lifestyle choices [1]. These tasks often require numeracy, or the ability to make sense of numbers [2], which is an important component of the health literacy needed to navigate health care systems [3]. Unfortunately, patients often struggle to grasp numerical concepts essential for understanding and communicating health-relevant information [2], [4], [1]. Patients with lower numeracy are more likely to misunderstand test results, undermining health decisions, behaviors, and outcomes [5]. Older adults, the most frequent consumers of health information because they often self-manage chronic illness, tend to have lower numeracy and literacy skills [6], [7], [8].
Patients increasingly receive or find health information through health information technology (HIT). For example, patient portals to Electronic Medical Record (EMR) systems are intended to bridge patients and providers by ensuring that patients have continuous access to their health information and services. Portals have expanded the delivery of numeric information to patients because of federal requirements for ‘meaningful use’ of EMRs [9], and there is some evidence that they improve patient outcomes [10]. However, they are underutilized [11], especially by older adults with lower health literacy [12], [13]. Portal use among older adults is predicted by limited numeracy, even when controlling for cognitive ability [14], [15].
Portals are also underutilized because they function more as information repositories than as tools to engage patients in self-care. Patients may also misunderstand portal-based information [14], [15]. For example, clinicians at our partner health organization have expressed concern that their patients can become confused about test results delivered through their EMR portal without prior discussion with their provider, and need to call to get help understanding the results. In their view, the portal may sometimes increase rather than reduce clinical workload and impact the quality of care delivered to their patients. This concern is echoed in the literature on patient/provider communication. While there is general agreement that face-to-face communication between providers and patients is a key to effective patient education, there is also recognition of diminishing time for this communication, so that critical information is less likely to be presented. In addition, information that is presented may be misunderstood by patients [16]. For this and other reasons, patients often forget important information presented by their provider [17]. In short, while HIT has the potential to support patient/provider collaboration despite diminished opportunity for face-to-face communication, this potential has yet to be realized [9], [18].
Our project is intended to improve use of portal information by older adults with diverse numeracy and literacy abilities, so that portals can better support patient-centered care. The project has three phases. (1) Develop portal message formats for clinical test results and evaluate them in a simulated patient portal environment. (2) Develop a tool for clinicians to annotate test results for their patients, facilitating collaborative use of portals by providers and patients. (3) Evaluate use of the tool and analyze patient responses to the clinician-constructed messages in an actual portal system.
In this paper, we focus on Phase 1 goals and describe a multidisciplinary approach to designing and evaluating portal-based messages that convey clinical test results so as to support patient-centered care. We first outline a theory-based framework for designing effective message formats that convey numerical information to diverse patients through portals (Fig. 1). The framework encompasses theories from cognitive and behavioral science as well as computational/engineering approaches. This cognitive informatics approach [19] helps explain why patient portals often fail to support patient/provider collaboration and guides our approach to designing and evaluating portal messages. We then describe how we evaluate whether the formats improve comprehension of messages about test results by older adults with diverse abilities. The approach combines quantitative (e.g., response accuracy, Likert scale responses) and qualitative (interview) measures, as well as experimental and individual difference methods in order to investigate not only which formats are more effective, but whether some formats benefit some types of patients more than others. In the present paper we describe the rationale for and methods involved in our approach, as well as results from two pilot studies that are part of developing the portal messages.Download : Download high-res image (170KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Framework guiding the design and evaluation of portal messages (adapted from [20]).
1.1. Designing actionable portal messages1.1.1. Theoretical frameworkNumeric information such as test results is often presented in patient portals as a table of numbers with little context (e.g., information about the scale for the scores, or relation of the scores to risk for illness [15] (see Fig. 2A). Therefore, patients, especially older adults with lower literacy and numeracy abilities, may struggle to make sense of their test results [21], [4]. Designing formats that help patients understand and use numeric information requires explaining how patients understand and respond to this kind of information [1]. The framework in Fig. 1 integrates fuzzy trace memory, health literacy, text processing, and behavior change theories in order to identify processes involved in understanding and responding to portal messages, as well as the patient abilities/resources that influence these processes.Download : Download high-res image (82KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2a. Standard message format.According to fuzzy trace theory [4], people understand and remember information at multiple levels, as shown in the Comprehension box in Fig. 1. In particular, this theory distinguishes detailed quantitative analysis using verbatim representations from intuitive reasoning based on simple gist representations of information, extending this distinction beyond linguistic information to numbers, pictures, graphs, events, and other forms of information [22].The verbatim level captures the literal facts or “surface form” of information, preserving information about precise numeric values. However, making sense of numbers in order to act on them often requires interpreting the information in terms of goals and knowledge to also create a gist-based representation, which captures its meaning or interpretation (based on a person’s age, education, and illness experience, among other factors known to affect meaning see Fig. 1; also [21]). In other words, gist representations capture the bottom-line implications of the numbers for health, and therefore are less precise than verbatim representations. They are organized around more qualitative dimensions such as categorical or ordinal relations that are often affective and evaluative (good/bad; higher/lower).People encode verbatim representations as well as multiple gist representations of the same information. When presented with various numbers (e.g., test results), people encode verbatim representations of the numbers and gist representations that capture the order of magnitudes of the different scores (e.g., whether they are increasing or decreasing and which magnitudes seem large or small; [22]). Accurate gist understanding of test results includes implications of the results for risk of illness, and therefore can support decision making about self-care. For instance, gist representations of cholesterol test results may capture ordinal values of risk for heart disease, such as lower/borderline/higher.People generally prefer to operate on the fuzziest or least precise representation that they can to accomplish a task, such as making a decision [21], [22]. They begin with the simplest distinctions (e.g., categorical) and then move to more precise representations (e.g., ordinal and interval) as needed. Therefore, categorical or ordinal gist, or gist combined with verbatim representations, may be most effective for understanding implications of test results for risk, depending on task requirements [23], [21].Gist is similar to the concept of situation model in text comprehension theory. Situation models represent the situations described by the text and are created by integrating text information with knowledge [24]. Both gist and situation model concepts emphasize that comprehension depends on knowledge and help explain how comprehension supports decision making and action.The process-knowledge model of health literacy [25], [20] draws on theories of text comprehension to identify processes involved in understanding health information at verbatim and gist levels. These include word recognition and integrating the concepts associated with words into propositions. Understanding numeric information requires similar processes [2], [4]. For example, understanding cholesterol scores involves identifying numeric values (verbatim representation) and mapping the values to categorical or ordinal risk categories (gist representation). These gist representations for the component scores may be integrated into an overall or global gist representation of risk associated with the message. Integrating the scores can be challenging, in part because they have different scales. The high-density lipoprotein (HDL) scale may confuse patients because it has an opposite polarity from the other scales (higher values indicate lower rather than higher risk [26]). Because gist comprehension depends on patients’ goals and illness knowledge, information from the scores may be integrated with knowledge and plans, similar to the situation model constructed from text [20]. The challenge of understanding cholesterol scores is reflected in the finding that adults generally know little about their current or target cholesterol scores [27].As seen in the left part of Fig. 1, these processes in turn depend on several types of cognitive abilities or resources, as well as broader patient characteristics such as age and education. These general cognitive resources include processing capacity (e.g., working memory) and knowledge (of language and health-related concepts), as well as non-cognitive resources such as affect, which is especially likely to influence gist comprehension of risk for illness because gist is often organized in terms of threat and other evaluative dimensions [20], [28].Aging influences risk comprehension processes because of age-related changes in the cognitive and affective resources needed for comprehension [6]. Processing capacity tends to decline with age, while general knowledge (e.g., about language) and domain-specific knowledge (e.g., about health) tend to grow with age-related increases in experience. These age-related resource limits and gains interact to influence health literacy [25] and comprehension of health information [29], such that high levels of knowledge can offset processing capacity limits on comprehension. Aging is also accompanied by increasing focus on affect and emotion, which influences understanding and decision making about health information [30], [20].While the left side of the framework in Fig. 1 identifies patient abilities that influence comprehension at verbatim and gist levels, the right side shows that perception of the risk associated with test results is influenced by comprehension, and therefore is likely to depend on the cognitive and affective resources that influence gist comprehension. Risk perception is also shaped by other factors such as beliefs about illness (e.g., How susceptible and vulnerable to the illness am I? [31], [32]).According to theories of behavior change (e.g., the theory of reasoned action/planned behavior [33], the health-action process approach [34], common-sense model, [32]), risk perception in turn shapes attitudes toward actions that may mitigate perceived risk, such as taking medication or following exercise and diet recommendations. Behavioral attitudes are influenced by other factors as well, such as beliefs about whether the actions influence factors believed to be linked to the illness [31]. For example, patients may understand that their cholesterol scores indicate high risk for cardiovascular illness, but do not believe that exercise or diet reduce this risk. Finally, behavioral attitudes predict intention to perform the behaviors, which predict performance of the behaviors (for review [35]). In short, the framework suggests comprehension of health information is an important influence on health-related decision making and behavior, so that it is critical to deliver health information in ways that support comprehension. This is especially crucial for patients with low health literacy and numeracy.
1.2. Improving comprehension and use of portal-based numeric informationThe literature on risk perception suggests that people better extract gist that supports decision making and action if numbers are presented in a context that supports comprehension processes (e.g., mapping numbers to risk categories that guide appropriate affective/evaluative responses [23], [28]). Enriched contexts may also improve the ability to use verbatim numeric information when making decisions [23]. Our framework suggests that enriched context will especially benefit older adults with fewer cognitive resources by reducing comprehension demands on processing capacity and enabling use of prior knowledge. For example, research on age differences in memory for numeric information suggests that relying on gist may especially benefit older adults with lower health literacy because their verbatim memories are less robust [28], [36]. In addition, age differences in choice quality are reduced when decisions are based on affect or bottom-line valence [37]. However, we note that these claims have not been evaluated in the context of patient portals. Accurate gist understanding in turn may help calibrate older adults’ risk perception based on information such as clinical test results, and therefore support their attitudes toward and intention to perform behaviors that address this risk.Traditionally, patients (especially with lower health literacy) rely on providers to help them understand information such as their clinical test results. In face-to-face communication, providers can use both verbal (e.g., words that emphasize key concepts) and nonverbal cues (tone of voice, facial expressions) to indicate (1) what information is most important, and (2) appropriate affective and evaluative reactions to this information, which help patients understand the gist of their test results [38], [4]. Providers’ nonverbal as well as verbal behaviors have been found to predict patient satisfaction and other outcomes [39], [40]. Unfortunately, providers do not consistently use these strategies because of limited communication time and inadequate training, so patients leave office visits without enough information or remembering little of what was presented [17]. Portals exacerbate this problem of limited provider support for patient comprehension because portal-based test results are usually delivered as a set of numbers with minimal context (e.g., about the scale of test score values), often in a table format (for example, see Fig. 2A).We are investigating whether formats designed to enhance the context of standard portal messages about cholesterol and diabetes screening test results improve gist comprehension and risk perception, and boost attitudes toward and intention to perform self-care behaviors. More specifically, we investigate verbally, graphically, and video-enhanced formats that provide increasing levels of support for gist-level understanding of the risk indicated by test results. They may also increase motivation to make decisions related to self-care behaviors that mitigate risk, although the display features that improve comprehension are not always the most effective for motivating actions [41].The verbally enhanced format provides verbal cues often used in face-to-face communication to help patients understand the risk associated with the test scores (see Fig. 2B). For example, labels for evaluative categories (low, borderline, or high risk) are added to the message to provide context for interpreting the specific scores, which should facilitate the process of mapping the score to the appropriate region of risk. Such labels promote emotional processing of the quantitative information [23] and may especially help older adults, who tend to have high levels of verbal ability and focus on emotional meaning [30]. In addition, categorical information is often processed with little effort, which may benefit older adults who experience declines in processing capacity [23].Download : Download high-res image (111KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2b. Verbally enhanced message format.The graphically enhanced condition provides graphical as well as verbal context for gist comprehension (see Fig. 2C). The test scores are embedded in graphic representations of the scale for each score, with color coding reinforcing the verbal labels of each region of risk. The format emphasizes the ordering of the regions from lower to higher risk (or higher to lower risk for HDL), which should support ordinal gist understanding [41], [23]. Such graphics support gist understanding of numbers that is organized around evaluative and affective dimensions [42], [43], [4], and have been found to improve patients’ understanding of their health parameters, including cholesterol and blood pressure [26].Download : Download high-res image (119KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2c. Graphically enhanced message format.In the most enhanced message condition, the same graphic display (with the labeled test scores) is accompanied by a video of a physician discussing the results and their implications for risk (Fig. 2D). The physician provides high-level commentary about the results, using nonverbal cues (prosody, facial expressions) and verbal cues (the same risk category labels as in the other enhanced formats) to signal information relevance and guide affective interpretation, as in ideal face-to-face communication.Download : Download high-res image (183KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2d. Video enhanced message format. (Speech balloon is for illustration purposes only. Participants in the study hear the speech.)Based on our framework and the reviewed literature, we expect that the more enhanced messages will be better understood and more acceptable to patients (meeting their informational and affective needs) by providing context that helps guide understanding of specific test values, particularly at the gist level. Adding verbal labels for risk categories to the standard messages should help older adults integrate numeric information into a gist representation [8], and especially benefit those with lower health literacy by reducing the need for high levels of numeracy and processing capacity (e.g., working memory) to develop gist representations [23]. Evaluative labels also help older adults interpret and integrate numbers in terms of their affective significance, so that they can develop affectively as well as cognitively organized gist representations that support health decisions [23]. In the graphically enhanced condition, embedding the labeled scores in the graphic number lines for each scale helps convey quantitative information more efficiently than verbal and numeric formats do [44], so that patients better integrate risk information across test scores into a gist representation. These graphic formats may especially benefit older adults with lower health literacy by making key gist features more cognitively accessible [23], [4]. Finally, the multimedia video format may be most effective because the verbal and nonverbal cues reinforce each other [45], [46]. Differences in performance associated with numeracy and literacy skills may also be reduced, by decreasing the need for numeracy-based skills and encouraging the use of affect to understand risk.With this study design, we can explore trade-offs between the extent of message enhancement and gains in patient response. This is clinically important because if minimal enhancement substantially boosts comprehension, these messages may be most cost-effective for many patients and applications.However, the video format would be difficult to implement in actual patient portals because different videos would be required for each patient and set of test results. Therefore, we are developing a computer-based agent (CA), or ‘virtual provider’ to deliver health information in portal environments. Ideally, the CA emulates best practices for face-to-face communication but is also generative, with capability of delivering a wide range of health information to diverse patients. In our portal format evaluation studies, this CA-enhanced format will be identical to the video condition, except the video is replaced by a CA being developed using the video as a template.Our CA builds on progress in developing CAs for human-computer systems. CAs with realistic facial expressions, gestures, and other relational cues improve learning in tutoring systems compared to text-based systems [47], [48], [49], in part by engendering social responses. [8] While CAs are often used and evaluated in education settings, evaluation of applications in health care are less frequent, although Bickmore and colleagues have developed CAs that support a variety of patient goals and have helped diverse patients to follow self-care recommendations compared to text-based or lower fidelity interfaces ([50], [51], [52], also see [53]). CAs in EMR portals may especially help patients with lower numeracy and literacy because, as in face-to-face communication, they can provide commentary with nonverbal cues (prosody, facial expressions) and verbal cues (risk category labels) to guide gist comprehension.
