Developing new and improved clean-energy technologies is an important part of any strategy to combat global climate change. For example, generation of electricity and heat is the largest source of carbon emissions, accounting for 42 percent of carbon emissions worldwide in 2012 (IEA, 2014). Meeting the climate policy goals currently under consideration, such as European Union discussions to reduce emissions by 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2030 or the U.S. Clean Power Plan goal of reducing emissions from the electricity sector by 32 percent by 2030, will not be possible without replacing much of the current fossil fuels-based electric generating capacity with alternative, carbon-free energy sources.
Because clean energy technologies are usually not competitive with fossil fuels without policy support (Greenstone and Looney, 2012), a large academic literature has emerged evaluating the role of environmental policy for fostering clean energy innovation. Much of this research focuses on the private sector, showing that both higher energy prices and targeted support for renewable energy, such as feed-in tariffs or renewable portfolio standards, lead to increases in clean energy patents.2
Even when environmental regulations encourage private sector innovation, firms will focus research efforts on technologies that are closest to market (Johnstone et al., 2010). Yet, one challenge facing many climate-friendly innovations is the long time frame from initial invention to successful market deployment. Consider, for instance, the case of solar energy. Despite research efforts that began during the energy crises of the 1970s, solar is still only cost competitive without policy support in niche markets, such as remote off-grid locations. This leaves a role for government-sponsored R&D to fill in the gaps, particularly in the case of climate change, where a diversified energy portfolio will be necessary to meet currently proposed emission reduction targets. Recognizing this need, during the December 2015 Paris climate meetings, a coalition of governments pledged to double their renewable energy R&D budgets to over $32 billion over the next five years (Sanchez and Sivaram 2017).
While many studies have looked at private sector energy R&D, fewer papers address the effectiveness of public sector funding for clean energy R&D. Those that do typically find a positive effect of publicly funded R&D on patenting (e.g. Johnstone et al., 2010; Verdolini and Galeotti, 2011; Dechezleprêtre and Glachant 2014; Nesta et al., 2014). However, these studies typically include just a single lagged value of energy R&D, raising questions about what is truly identified.3
To better ascertain the effectiveness of public energy research, Popp (2016) links data on scientific publications to public energy R&D funding. For evaluating public research funding efforts, publication data provide a more appropriate outcome measure than patents. By looking at the effect of public R&D funding on scientific articles, Popp (2016) isolates the effect of public R&D to shed light on the process through which public R&D helps develop scientific knowledge. As the ultimate goal of government energy R&D funding is not an article, but rather a new technology, Popp uses citations to link these articles to new energy patents. While public funding does lead to new articles, lags in both the creation of a new publication and the transfer of this knowledge to applied work mean that public R&D spending may take several years to go from new article to new patent.4
While Popp (2016) focuses on the time it takes for the results of publicly funded R&D to be cited by a new patent, this paper extends that work by providing more detail on the knowledge flows between published and patented clean energy research. Given recent calls for more publicly funded energy R&D efforts, such as the aforementioned pledges at the December 2015 Paris climate meetings, identifying the investments most valuable to further advancing energy research can help decision makers target R&D funds towards both the technologies and institutions where they are most likely to be successful. This paper uses citation data from both scientific articles and patents to answer two questions pertaining to the quality of energy research output:
1)What information is most useful to the development of new technology? That is, are scientific articles cited frequently by other articles also more likely to be cited by patents, or are the types of articles cited by patents different from those cited by articles? Popp (2016) argues that there is room to expand public R&D budgets, as there is little change in either the quantity of published research or the quality, measured by citations, after large increases in public energy R&D. However, are citations within the published literature an appropriate measure of the relevance of this published research for applied work? In Section 4, I show that highly cited journal articles do receive more citations by patents, suggesting that counts of journal-to-journal citations are a good indicator of the ultimate value of an article for technology development.2)Which institutions produce the most valuable research? Are there differences across technologies? Using patent and article citations as a measure of knowledge flows, in Section 5 I ask which institutions provide the most useful building blocks for future researchers. Do collaborations between public and private research organizations increase flows of knowledge among groups? Government funded research is performed by a variety of institutions, including universities, government laboratories, and the private sector. As governments prepare to expand renewable energy R&D funding, such evidence can inform where public research funds can best be targeted. While government research efforts are often criticized as wasteful, I find that government patents are cited more frequently by researchers than other patents, and that government research articles are more likely to be cited by future patents. Thus, research not only funded but also performed by the government does appear to play an important translational role linking basic and applied research. Universities play a less important role in wind research than for solar and biofuels, suggesting that wind energy research is at a more applied stage where commercialization and final product development is more important than basic research.
