Extreme-scale distributed scientific applications often need to move large volumes of data, now frequently termed as “big data”, on the order of terabytes at present and petabytes or exabytes in the near future for collaborative data analysis and knowledge discovery [1], [2], [3]. For example, the fast-camera data from the large-scale data exploration process at the Korea Superconducting Tokamak Advanced Research (KSTAR) has reached 3.9 TB in 10 s [4], which makes the existing KSTAR workflow management systems hard-pressed to keep the pace. A promising solution is to quickly move the generated data to remote collaborative sites, such as Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), for near-real-time data analysis before it reaches the slow disk storage, which is known as in-flight analysis (or in-transit processing). If not transferred in a timely manner, the generated data may become stale and useless, resulting in a tremendous waste of resources [2]. Hence, providing fast and reliable data transfer with guaranteed performance has become a crucial task, especially in unstable networks.
Unfortunately, the default best-effort IP network infrastructure is inadequate to handle data transfers at such scales [1]. To address this challenge, new strategies for provisioning dedicated channels have been developed in several high-performance network (HPN) initiatives, and many bandwidth reservation services have been offered to support data transfer in mission-critical applications, such as On-Demand Secure Circuits and Advance Reservation System (OSCARS) of Energy Sciences Network (ESnet) [5], and Advanced Layer 2 Service (AL2S) of Internet2 [6]. Because of the rapidly increasing data transfer demands, such bandwidth reservation services are expected to proliferate into more existing and future HPNs.
HPNs are typically comprised of various types of network devices that are deployed across large geographical areas, where the nodes and links are prone to failures. The challenges of bandwidth reservation arise from not only the performance requirements of bandwidth reservation requests (BRRs) but also their reliability requirement. A good scheduling strategy should be able to make an intelligent suggestion of data transfer options to satisfy users’ Quality of Service (QoS) requirements, and meanwhile accommodate as many BRRs as possible to maximize resource utilization. The ever-increasing network scale and user base also impose additional challenges on the complexity of scheduling algorithms for scalability.
The core of an HPN with bandwidth reservation is a control plane that is responsible for scheduling BRRs. For an incoming BRR, the control plane computes the most appropriate end-to-end network path if any, reserves necessary bandwidth for the given data transfer on above path, and releases the reserved bandwidth after the data transfer is completed [1]. The focus of our work is on the design of efficient bandwidth reservation algorithms used by the control plane to guarantee certain QoS and improve resource utilization in unreliable HPNs that are subject to node and link failures. We consider two generic types of BRRs concerning data transfer reliability with different objectives and constraints: (i) to maximize the data transfer reliability under a data transfer deadline constraint, referred to as MaxR-DC, and (ii) to minimize the data transfer completion time under a data transfer reliability constraint, referred to as MinT-RC. We use the Three-parameter Generalized Gamma Distribution (3GG) to model the node and link failures in HPNs because of its generality, practicality and flexibility in modeling failure events [7], [8]. For a batch of MaxR-DC and MinT-RC BRRs, we propose two optimal periodic bandwidth reservation algorithms, referred to as Opt-MaxR-DC and Opt-MinT-RC, each of which is proved to optimize the scheduling of individual requests. For each BRR in the batch, the proposed Opt-MaxR-DC/Opt-MinT-RC algorithm returns the reservation option with the highest data transfer reliability/the earliest data transfer completion time under the deadline/reliability constraint. To illustrate the superiority of our algorithms, we conduct a comparative performance evaluation with the algorithm currently being used in OSCARS and its slightly modified version, referred to as OSCARS-MaxR-DC and OSCARS-MinT-RC, respectively. OSCARS of ESnet is one of the most widely used bandwidth reservation service in scientific area [9]. To mimic the real HPN scenario, we gathered the real network data from ESnet and drawn its topology, and then we run extensive experiments on the simulated ESnet topology. The experimental results confirm the performance superiority of our algorithms in terms of various performance metrics.
To the best of our knowledge, we are among the first to study transfer reliability for bandwidth reservation in HPNs. All existing researches regarding bandwidth reservation/scheduling in network area are constrained within a time interval as shown in Section 2. As far as we know, we are the first to have considered the case when bandwidth reservation/scheduling is beyond the given time interval.
