Computer worms are self-replicating programs that use the Internet to send sources to other nodes without any user's intervention. They can cause large scale of network congestion. The first known worm, called Morris, appeared in 1988. Since then, new computer worms have come into the world frequently, including the Code Red worm [1], [2], the Code Red worm v2 [3], the Witty worm [4] and the Slammer worm [5]. Each of them can rapidly infect millions of computers and bring huge economic losses [6], [7]. Recently, mobile devices have become increasingly pervasive. According to the report published by CNNIC (China Internet Network Information Center) in 2015 [8], there are about 5.57 billion smartphone users in China, which are far more than computer users. This situation attracts attackers to propagate worm programs among mobile devices. In 2004, the first Bluetooth-based worm, named Cabir, was launched into the world [9]. In 2008, Commwarrior, an SMS/MMS-based worm, appeared in the Internet [10]. At present, the convenience of Wi-Fi has made it one of the widely used means to connect to the Internet among mobile devices. A new Wi-Fi worm, called Chameleon, which could spread in a manner similar to that of airborne diseases, appeared in 2014 [11]. However, the majority of smartphones do not have any effective methods to prevent worm attacks, which leaves them vulnerable to such attacks. Smartphones compromised by worms can cause great losses to users, including data leakage, system damage and financial loss.
In the past decades, researchers have proposed many different mathematical models to explore the dynamic behaviors and characteristics of computer worms in the Internet. Inspired by the researches on biological viruses, the original model, the SI (Susceptible-Infectious) classical epidemic model, has been presented [12]. Based on it, lots of models have been put forward subsequently, such as the SIR (Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered) model [13], [14] and the SIRS (Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered-Susceptible) model [15], [16], [17]. It is unreasonable that all these models assume that susceptible nodes turns into infected nodes instantly. In fact, a certain period is required for infected nodes to send worm copies to susceptible nodes. Thus the transition from susceptible nodes to infected nodes is not immediate. Accordingly, some researchers proposed a new state named the Exposed state (S), and then presented some new models, e.g., the SEIR (Susceptible–Exposed–Infectious–Recovered) model [18], the SEIRS (Susceptible-Exposed- Infectious-Recovered-Susceptible) model [19], [20], [21]. These models assume that an exposed node cannot infect other susceptible nodes. Considering the different network topologies and the dynamic countermeasures taken by ISPs and users, the SEISV (Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious- Susceptible with Vaccination) model [22] and the e-SEIAR (extended Susceptible-Exposed- Infectious-Benign worm-Recovered) model [23] were put forward lately. Although these aforementioned works have solved problems of computer worms, due to the differences between computers and smartphones they cannot be directly applied in the mobile environment, especially in the Wi-Fi network.
It can be observed that in the Wi-Fi network the Wi-Fi base station can control (continue or disrupt) the connection. In particular, it can easily quarantine infected nodes by cutting off the connection between the infected nodes and other nodes. Based on the fact, in this paper we at first define the Quarantined state (Q) to represent the infected nodes quarantined by the Wi-Fi base station, and then build a new propagation model, the SEIQR (Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious- Quarantined-Recovered) model, for mobile device worms. This model can describe the dynamic behaviors of the worms spreading in the Wi-Fi environment. Furthermore, using the reproduction number R0, we prove the local and global stabilities of the worm-free equilibrium and the endemic equilibrium. The worm-free equilibrium is locally and globally asymptotically stable if R0 < 1, whereas the endemic equilibrium is locally asymptotically stable if R0 < 1.
We evaluate the performance of our model by comprehensive experiments with different infection rates and quarantine rates. (1) When the infection rateβ=0.0000005 and R0 < 1, the tendency of the worm propagation declines rapidly. (2) When the infection rateβ=0.000004 and R0 > 1, all states reach their endemic equilibrium points and the worm disappears. (3) As the quarantine rate ξ increases, the worm propagates more slowly and infects less nodes in the Internet. In particular, if ξ=0, i.e. no infected node is quarantined, nearly 65% of susceptible nodes are quickly infected within a short period. (4) As the infection rate β increases, the worm infects more susceptible nodes in a shorter time. The results indicate that our mechanism can combat the worms propagated in Wi-Fi networks.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the basic epidemic propagation models of worms. In Section 3, we propose our model, develop the system of differential equations, and calculate the basic reproduction number. The local and global stability conditions for the worm-free equilibrium and the endemic equilibrium are analyzed in Section 4. In Section 5, we present the results and the numerical analysis of the simulations. The paper is summarized with some future works in Section 6.
