Including the public in environmental monitoring, research and decision-making has been an area of growing research among conservation biologists (Reed, 2008) and has implications for understanding the nature of many current pressing contemporary social and ecological issues (Crain et al., 2014). The interest in this area has given rise to several paradigms related to public participation in decision-making and more inclusive forms of conservation, including citizen science (Bonney et al., 2009) and participatory modelling (Voinov and Bousquet, 2010). Although these areas of research share similar goals and provide a space for integrating the general public and specific stakeholders into the generation of scientific information, reviews of the literature in both fields indicate that the majority of citizen science projects and participatory modelling contexts are often not explicitly designed to lead to conservation action (e.g., Conrad and Hilchey, 2011). We raise this issue and contend that with targeted educational training, motivated volunteer groups can play a larger role in conservation if afforded the opportunity to negotiate and represent their understanding of local environmental issues through modelling with scientists and, further, collect data that informs the revision of these models leading to an iterative process of hypothesis testing and model validation. We discuss how the strengths of citizen science and participatory modelling can be integrated under one program and present case study data working with two community groups in the US who engaged in two collaborative adaptive management projects focussed on local land management issues.
1.1. Citizen scienceThe term ‘citizen science’ falls under the umbrella of public participation in scientific research and has been shown to result in different outcomes, based on the structure of the project, including contributions to (1) scientific research (e.g., increasing research findings and publications); (2) environmental decision-making (e.g., action, legislation, and positive social relationships); and (3) the individuals participating in these programs through increased personal skills and knowledge (Shirk et al., 2012). Although the umbrella term citizen science generally refers to several forms of public contribution to scientific research, the type and degree of participation across different citizen science programs varies widely. Given a growing number of citizen science case studies in the literature (Jordan et al., 2015), researchers have begun to typify citizen science projects based on the degree to which the public is involved in the scientific process (Cooper et al., 2007, Bonney et al., 2009, Shirk et al., 2012). These general categories include (1) contributory projects that are usually scientist designed where the public is included mainly in data collection; (2) collaborative projects that are projects that are structured by scientists but where citizens are provided opportunities to collaborate on project design and in data collection and analysis; and (3) co-created projects which are more democratic partnerships where the public is actively engaged with all steps of the scientific process. Not surprisingly, the majority of citizen science projects fall into the first category where volunteers are engaged mainly to help increase data collection capacity (Bonney et al., 2009).The bias in project design toward contributory citizen science projects is understandable, but may limit the type of contribution that citizen science makes toward conservation. For example, contributory projects provide clear benefits to researchers who can substantially increase data collection and analytical power that would not otherwise be possible. Additionally, contributory projects allow researchers the ability to maintain control of project design, including defining what questions are asked and how the data should be analyzed. Indeed, some projects that require little training or low scientific reasoning skills to participate can engage hundreds of thousands of volunteers, in many cases through crowdsourcing, which can generate hundreds of thousands of observations (Lintott et al., 2011). The popularity of contributory projects also aligns well with the predominant reasons for citizen participation which some researchers have found to be largely driven by a general interest in contributing to authentic scientific research (Wiggins and Crowston, 2012) and social motivations like engaging in a community with similar interests (Raddick et al., 2010).Although contributory projects have undoubtedly led to significant discoveries across many scientific disciplines, including conservation (Newman et al., 2012), the impacts of these contributions may be somewhat removed from the local-scale at which citizens participate and may not satisfy volunteers who are motivated to improve environmental quality (Wiggins and Crowston, 2012). In fact, there are a growing number of more collaborative and co-created projects emerging from the literature (see Nicosia et al., 2014 and Ramirez-Andreotta et al., 2015) namely by groups of volunteers that are formed because of a specific research issue and not by contribution to science more generally. However, compared to contributory projects, it is not currently well understood how these more democratic forms of citizen science can be supported, how these processes should be structured, and what outcomes can be reasonably expected (Gray et al., 2012b). While many researchers have indicated that citizen science holds considerable promise for increasing the quality of environmental decisions and even contributing to social-ecological resilience (Shirk et al., 2012), empirical reviews of citizen science programs indicate that the data collected in a majority of projects may not lead to changes in management decision-making (Conrad and Hilchey, 2011) much less tractable and measurable conservation outcomes. Further, of particular interest to conservation biologists, is capitalizing on those specific volunteer communities that are motivated to participate by an interest in stewardship. Such groups likely hold considerable promise, not only for contributing to large-scale conservation issues (Sullivan et al., 2014) but as a network of communities that seek conservation change at the local-scale, driven by an interest in place-based issues (Newman et al. 2017). Understanding the process that these groups undergo will likely provide evidence that citizen science can lead to changes in environmental decision-making however, to date, this hypothesis remains largely untested. Indeed, scientists and communities currently lack the tools and frameworks required to easily establish more collaborative and co-created citizen science projects (Gray et al., 2014a) which limits the conservation community's ability to incorporate stakeholders' knowledge, skills and manpower to address issues of both scientific and public concern.
1.2. Participatory modellingDuring the same time that citizen science has come to prominence, participatory modelling has also been a growing area of both academic research and applied practice. The justification for including stakeholders in scientific modelling practices is based on the acknowledgement that: (1) model-based reasoning is a predominant and preferred basis of environmental decision-making in contemporary environmental management; (2) public participation is an essential component to informed environmental decision-making; and (3) stakeholder groups often hold unique and complex knowledge that is useful for understanding the dynamics of social-ecological systems (Gray et al., 2015a). This increased interest in participatory modelling has given rise to a range of stakeholder-centered modelling tools, practices, and guidelines that aim to provide decision support in participatory environmental planning contexts (Voinov and Bousquet, 2010, Voinov et al., 2016). However, even with this increase in tool and software development, some critics have cautioned that diversity of modelling practices does not necessarily indicate diversity in function (Jones et al., 2009) and that the most significant contribution of including stakeholders in modelling is community learning, facilitated by structured knowledge sharing (Voinov and Bousquet, 2010).Similar to citizen science, researchers have recently begun to typify the benefits of participatory modelling through systematic evaluation of the growing number of case studies available. Such efforts identify trends in both the process and products associated with participatory modelling with implications for improved conservation decision-making. For example, Sandker et al. (2010) found that although there are several common tools associated with the practice of participatory modelling, including Bayesian methods, Agent-based modelling, and Systems Dynamic modelling among others, the largest contribution of engaging stakeholders in modelling included stimulating cross-sector planning, and facilitating discussions that helped participants to confront the drivers of environmental change and to recognize trade-offs in management strategies. The authors also found evidence of environmental decision-making outcomes as a result of the modelling process, but this was largely dependent on types of stakeholders that were included in the process. In terms of the modelling processes, case studies evaluated in their review varied in terms of the degree of participation among stakeholders, measured in terms of the amount of time that scientists, non-governmental organizations and stakeholder collaborated which ranged from creating models in a single workshop to prolonged involvement with a group of stakeholders over several months (Sandker et al., 2010). In a review of Bayesian network case studies, Duespohl et al. (2012) identified issues in terms of the cognitive loads associated with defining the conditional probabilities used to construct the models, reliability of expert knowledge, and a lack of satisfaction in the precision in model results. Others have also suggested that different modelling techniques may be more or less appropriate to employ given variation in the community engaged in the modelling process and the types of modelling practices that are useful for a given decision-making context (Gray et al., 2015a).Even though participatory modelling case studies are diverse, a consistent and clear benefit listed among all efforts comes in the form of structured social learning among those involved (Voinov and Bousquet, 2010). Surprisingly, however, documenting the learning that takes place often takes a backseat to the model that is produced or documenting the process of engagement. Even when learning has been evaluated, some research has indicated that changing the way people think is a slow process. For example, Pala and Vennix (2005) evaluated conceptual change in students after participating in a systems dynamics course and indicated that even in formal settings, students were more likely to alter their structural understanding of systems rather than their underlying beliefs. In a review of six diverse participatory modelling case studies dealing with landscape management, Sandker et al. (2010) reported similar findings across a range of participants through standardized surveys. In the context of disaster planning, Henly-Shepard et al. (2015) by contrast, did report evidence of conceptual change among participants at the group-level by evaluating how the model produced by the community was revised iteratively over time. However this study did not focus on whether individuals within the community changed their understanding of the nature and dynamics of the environmental problem they were addressing.When considered together, these findings highlight the importance of (1) prolonged engagement between scientists, managers and stakeholders as they engage in the modelling process; (2) the need to evaluate conceptual change among participants both at the group and individual-level; and (3) understanding how the models produced (i.e. products) ultimately relate to decision-making or the plan of action that emerges from these collaborations.
1.3. Reconciling citizen science and participatory modelling for collaborative conservationAlthough both citizen science and participatory modelling have provided useful frameworks, methods, and tools for engaging the public with environmental research, monitoring, and decision-making; there remain questions about how to leverage these areas for clear use in conservation beyond mere public engagement through outreach (Voinov et al., 2016). While reviews of both citizen science and participatory modelling have identified common trends, typologies of participation and gaps in our understanding of these fields, new approaches are needed that draw on research in both of these fields in project design to increase decision-making agency (Jordan et al., 2016). Documenting both the process and products associated with citizen science and participatory modelling will give credence to the often mentioned, but largely unsupported claims that these programs hold value to conservation decision-making, especially at the local scale.To address some of the issues, we present the architecture and data from a citizen science program called Collaborative Science that includes web-based training, an embedded fuzzy cognitive mapping modelling software called Mental Modeler (www.mentalmodeler.org), and a web-based interface for data collection (www.citsci.org) to draw on the strengths of both of these fields to increase stakeholder contribution to conservation science and management. Specifically, our program seeks to increase the degree of participation from citizen groups who are motivated by local environmental conservation, as well as the representation of local stakeholder knowledge, to increase the quality of conservation outcomes by allowing scientists, environmental managers and citizen scientists to: (1) collaboratively define conservation issues of shared concern; (2) model and represent assumptions, evidence, and existing information about these issues; (3) run scenarios to discuss potential research or management options; and ultimately (4) co-develop citizen science research and environmental management plans with science professionals that lead to measurable impacts. We suggest that such an approach will help lead communities toward conservation action, through structured learning that allows knowledge to be shared among participants leading to a standardized representation of a hypothesis that can be validated through data collection. Additionally, by attempting to evaluate the conceptual change in individuals and in groups engaged in these practices, we attempt to link evidence of learning to model representations and ultimately conservation plans that are co-created thereby addressing gaps in both the citizen science and participatory modelling literatures.
