Uranium-series data are relied upon heavily to provide absolute, precise temporal frameworks for the pace, magnitude, and drivers of geological and climatological events over 10–105 year timescales. Examples of important applications include:
(a)Understanding past climate change, the carbon cycle, sea level, ocean chemistry, and paleoclimate, all of which bear strongly on predictions of climate change vulnerability (Edwards et al., 1987, Henderson, 2002, Henderson and Slowey, 2000, Wang et al., 2001, Yokoyama et al., 2001),(b)Determining igneous and volcanic histories, e.g., eruption timing, the times scales over which magmas are produced and delivered to volcanoes, and the frequency and magnitudes of volcanic events in space and time on the planet (e.g., Reid et al., 1997, Rubin, 2001, Cooper et al., 2001, Zellmer et al., 2008, Sims et al., 2013),(c)Dating fossil teeth, bones, and cave paintings (e.g., Grun et al., 2014, Pike et al., 2002, Pike et al., 2012),(d)Calibration of the radiocarbon (carbon-14) system (Bard et al., 1990, Chiu et al., 2005, Reimer et al., 2013),(e)Neotectonics and landform evolution (e.g., Priewisch, et al., 2014).
Present data-reporting practices for U-series geochronology data (sometimes also referred to as U-Th or Th/U data) vary widely among publications, and the data provided are commonly incomplete. These practices present a challenge when attempting to create syntheses, particularly for U-Th and Ra-Th geochronology applications, where the goal is to make comparisons of U-series ages among different publications or to re-evaluate or re-interpret the data. These circumstances ultimately hinder the utility and longevity of the data as well as the ability to make scientific advances beyond those in the original study that generated them. Given the importance of U-series geochronology in several diverse disciplines and the continuing need to access, compile, and re-interpret data, there is a clear value to establishing baseline data-reporting norms.
This issue has been previously addressed in the context of general geochemistry data (Goldstein et al., 2003) as well as for specific sub-disciplines (e.g., Renne et al., 2009). As with other geochemical techniques, advances in instrumentation and analytical methodologies have enabled the production of a greater volume of data, typically with improved precision and accuracy. Coupled with these developments is the increasing ability of authors to publish more extensive suites of data in online supplements that are linked to journal publications and in open-access, independently maintained community databases. Despite these advances, in the absence of explicit community-endorsed data-reporting norms, the tendency for inconsistent and incomplete data reporting of U-series geochronological measurements continues.
Common problems encountered with U-series data-reporting share some similarities with those in other geochronology disciplines and fall into two main categories. The first is not including enough information about the analysis for reviewers and readers to evaluate the quality of the data relative to discipline practices. For instance, information about the relative 232Th abundance can be used to determine the impact of the detrital Th correction on a U-Th date of a carbonate, and therefore its reliability. The second is that it is not always possible to calculate (or re-calculate) a U-series date using the information provided in published data tables because of omission of information on reference materials, external reproducibility, and measured isotopic values. In addition, the application of revised decay constants for 230Th and 234U (Cheng et al., 2000, Cheng et al., 2013) has introduced systematic offsets among various sets of published U-series dates, further complicating data inter-comparisons.
We summarize below a proposed set of minimum data and metadata to serve as a community norm that, if provided when a dataset is published in a peer-reviewed journal article, will greatly aid in later reuse. We also encourage researchers to provide suggested additional items of information that would allow subsequent reanalysis. The guidelines in this paper arise out of consultation with end users and producers of U-series data over the course of several community-driven workshops. These discussions helped to define the need for this norm and provided guidance on how current data-reporting practices might be improved to leading practices that would support the needs of the wider community.
In addition to improving the longevity and utility of existing U-series data and facilitating editorial handling of manuscripts dealing with U-series measurements, our vision is that a norm will also facilitate seamless importing of new measured and older legacy data into emerging cyberinfrastructure like the NSF-funded database hosted at geochron.org.
