Network embedding, known as network representation learning (NRL), aims to represent the components (such as nodes, edges, subgraphs, etc.) with low-dimensional vectors, in which the topology and properties of the network are maximally preserved. Since low-dimensional vectors can be easily processed by various machine learning methods, network embedding has become a very hot research field and attracted tremendous attention. It has witnessed the success of the network embedding in various applications recently [36]. The DeepWalk [21], LINE [25] and Node2vec [7] have been commonly considered as powerful methods and applied in various applications. NetMF [23] is a recent study which proves theoretically that the existing models with negative sampling can be unified into the factorization of a closed-form matrix. However, directly constructing and factorizing such dense matrix is prohibitively expensive in terms of both time and space, making it not scalable for large networks. To address this problem, NetSMF [22] is proposed to efficiently sparsify the dense matrix, enabling significant improvement in embedding learning. Nevertheless, all the above methods are designed to handle the homogenous network with single-typed nodes and edges.
In fact, the real-world networks are much more complicated, containing not only multi-typed nodes and edges but also a rich set of attributes. Depending on the network topology and attributed property, we categorize the homogeneous network into two types: Simple network and Attributed network, shown in Table 1. It is mainly consistent with the recent work [5] which is designed for attributed heterogenous network. The difference is that we consider both the multi-typed attributes and the semantic relationships hidden in attributes, and design a deep embedding learning model for attributed homogeneous network. It is worth mentioning that the attributed network is one of the most important networks [16].Table 1. The network types handled by different methods.Network TypeEmbedding MethodNode TypeEdge TypeAttributesTypeSemantic RelationshipSimple NetworkDeepWalk [21] LINE [25] node2vec [7] NetMF [23]SingleSingle//Attributed NetworkTADW [33]SingleSingleSingle/AANE [9]Single/LANE [10]Multi/SNE [16]Multi/SEANO [15]Multi/CANE [27]Single✓DeepEmLAN (the proposed method)Multi✓
As can be seen from Table 1, we focus on embedding learning for attributed networks. The attributes in different networks may refer to different contents. For example, in social networks, the attributes may be users’ opinions or comments; while in citation networks, the attributes may be the topics or keywords of papers. Additionally, labels (such as groups or community categories) are discrete and can be intrinsically considered as a type of important attribute. Taking these information into account often helps us improve the performance in many complex network analysis tasks, such as identifying high influential users [24], community detection [11], [35] and link prediction [31], [6], etc. Due to its vital importance and challenges, there have been tremendous attempts in the literature to investigate embedding learning for attributed networks. TADW [33] was proposed to incorporate the text features of nodes into NRL process through matrix factorizing. But the model can only handle the text attributes. AANE [9] was designed to model and incorporate the attribute proximities of nodes into NRL process in a distributed way. However, the model was trained in an unsupervised mode, and it cannot utilize the discriminative labels in the network. LANE [10] was able to smoothly incorporate label information into the attributed network embedding while preserving the correlation between diverse details. But this method suffered low learning efficiency due to the massive matrix operations. Indeed, the above algorithms are essentially the linear model, which is insufficient to capture the nonlinear information relations in complex network. Thus, the deep learning theory was introduced into some recent embedding algorithms to preserve the complicated relationships in attributed network. SEANO [15] was designed as an inductive deep learning framework to learn the robust representations that preserved the information of topologies, attributes and labels, jointly. CANE [27] was developed based on the attention mechanism to learn the more discriminative representations for the nodes in an attributed network.
To the best of our knowledge, no work has been devoted to exploring both the multi-typed attributes and the semantic relationships in an efficient way. In this paper, we develop a unified deep model to capture both rich attributed information and topology structure. The training process of DeepEmLAN consists of three parts which focus on preserving the information of topologies, attributes, and labels, respectively. Moreover, the three components are closely connected and interacted with each other. The topological information is captured by modeling the first-order and second-order proximities between nodes; the text attributes are processed with attention mechanism to capture the different roles of nodes in the process of interacting with different neighbors; the labels of the nodes are predicted using the mutual attention vectors obtained in the second part through multi-level nonlinear mapping. Besides, the parameters are adjusted with different elements which makes the embeddings are more adaptive for the subsequent machine learning tasks. Finally, we present a heuristic method to combine the temporary vectors obtained in the training process to generate the final representational vector for each node. In order to evaluate the proposed model, some extensive experiments are conducted on the tasks of multi-label classification and network reconstruction. The experimental results indicate that DeepEmLAN achieves significantly better performance compared with the state-of-the-art embedding methods. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows.
•We propose a unified deep model to learn the representational vector for each node of the network by considering both multi-typed attributes and the semantic relationships, simultaneously. The model can preserve and balance the mutual influences resulted from different types of information.•We present a heuristic combining method to generate the final representation for each node. It can make the nodes sharing more neighbors and similar text or label-enriched attributes closer in the representational space.•We extensively evaluate the proposed DeepEmLAN on the tasks of multi-label classification and network reconstruction with several real-world datasets. The experimental results indicate that DeepEmLAN model outperforms the competitive baselines significantly.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the related work. The problem to be solved in this paper is formulated in Section 3. In Section 4, we present the unified deep model to capture both topological and rich attributed information. The algorithm and the complexity analysis are also given in this section. Section 5 proves the effectiveness of the DeepEmLAN with the experimental results and analysis. Finally, Section 6 concludes this study and discusses our future work.
