Event histories recording user activities are routinely logged on devices such as computers and mobile phones. For a particular user these logs typically consist of a list of events where each event consists of a timestamp and some metadata associated with the event. For example, with popular Web browsers (such as Chrome, Internet Explorer, and Firefox) a variety of events related to user actions are logged on the local device. Examples of such actions include content downloads, URL requests, search history, and so on. Log files of user activity are also often accessible via cloud storage, for example for user events related to email activity, social media activity (such as Facebook and Twitter), and remote file storage and editing.
As digital devices become more prevalent, these types of user event histories are encountered with increasing regularity during forensic investigations. As an example, an investigator might be trying to determine if two event histories, corresponding to different usernames, were in fact generated by the same individual.
The primary contribution of this paper is the development of quantitative likelihood ratio techniques for forensic analysis of user-generated time-series in the form of event data. In particular we investigate score-based likelihood ratio methods in the context of determining whether two event histories are related, e.g., whether or not they were generated by the same individual. We focus in this paper on events that correspond to URL requests generated in a browser—however, the methodology we propose is broadly applicable to event data in general.
We begin by discussing related work, both in digital forensics as well as in score-based likelihood ratio methodologies and applications. We then discuss the theoretical foundations of the likelihood ratio and motivate the score-based likelihood ratio in the context of digital forensics. We then introduce relevant ideas from marked point processes, a statistical framework that has been widely used to analyze spatial point data, which we apply here to sequential event data streams. In particular we focus on the use of segregation and mingling indices as the basis for our score functions, and we describe how these techniques can be applied to evaluating the likelihood that two event streams were generated by the same source (or individual). We apply this methodology to a data set of event histories for 28 individuals, focusing on user activity related to social media. The results indicate that score functions based on marked point processes can have significant discriminative power for event-based data sets. In the final section of the paper we discuss both the promise and challenges involved in developing statistical analysis methods for event histories in the context of forensic investigations.
