Online social communities have become an integral component of people's daily lives, allowing users to easily create and share content with each other, and enjoy a variety of online applications and services on a real-time basis. Therefore, recommender systems that can accurately and efficiently identify and deliver interested content to individual users have become increasingly important. Many existing recommender systems [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8] adopt collaborative filtering (CF), a popular recommendation method that has high accuracy, low overhead, and is generally applicable to various application domains. CF works based on the idea that people who had similar interest in the past are likely to have similar interest in the future. In CF-based systems, the server collects user information, and then predicts a user's interest in an item based on the decisions (or ratings) of other similar users. In this process, users’ personal interests will be exposed to the recommender server, which raises privacy concerns [9], [10]. Recommender servers (service providers) not only gain information regarding users’ private interests, but also, in some cases, may share users’ private data with third parties to make personalized advertisements [11]. Moreover, user privacy may be exposed to the public via the open APIs of service providers [12] or attacked by malicious users [13], [14] in online communities. To address these privacy issues, a recommender system for online social communities should prevent the service provider from obtaining users’ private data while providing personalized content recommendation with high quality and high efficiency.
Recent research efforts toward privacy-preserving collaborative filtering (PPCF) have generated solutions in two main categories. One is based on secure multi-party computation (SMPC) [15], [16], [17], [18], and the other is based on randomization [19], [20], [21]. SMPC-based methods require a large amount of computation and communication in order for users to jointly compute a value (e.g., overall rating for an item) without disclosing their personal values (e.g., individual ratings). However, in online social communities, where the number of users and content items can reach millions or even billions, SMPC-based methods are inefficient and scale poorly. Meanwhile, this kind of methods is not suitable for specific applications, such as mobile recommender systems, in which mobile devices have limited computation and communication capabilities and battery capacities. Randomization-based methods put noises on user ratings before sending them to the server. This kind of methods generally trade accuracy for privacy, which means users will receive lower-quality recommendations in order to protect their privacy. Still, randomization-based methods cannot guarantee user privacy, since the server has a very high chance to reconstruct the true ratings of the users as shown by recent works [22], [23], [24].
In this paper, we present YANA (short for “you are not alone”), an efficient privacy-preserving recommender system for users in online social communities. YANA can protect user privacy, while at the same time achieving high recommendation quality and energy efficiency. YANA is group based – it automatically organizes users into groups with diverse interests, so that each user's private interests can be hidden among a set of users against recommender server. A number of pseudo users are created for each user group, each pseudo user represents a unique interest, and the union of all pseudo users covers all interests of a user group. The pseudo users communicate with the recommender server on behalf of the real users. The real users can then obtain personalized recommendations based on the server's recommendations to the pseudo users and their interest distribution among pseudo users, without exposing any private data to the server. We propose four SMPC protocols for different in-group computations, which ensure user privacy from group members in the recommendation process with high efficiency.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first complete work that tackles the efficiency problem of privacy-preserving recommender systems for online social communities.
Compared with our previous work [25], this paper improves YANA by proposing a new user group construction protocol, a novel user interest modelling method, as well as a suit of new SMPC protocols to strictly protect user privacy in user group construction, user interest modelling and content recommendation. Meanwhile, formal proofs are provided to prove the privacy preservation feature of YANA. Our key contributions are as follows:
1.We propose YANA, a novel user group-based privacy-preserving recommender system for users in online social communities, which can efficiently protect individual user's content interest privacy in the recommendation process.2.We propose four secure multi-party computation protocols to achieve efficient privacy-preserving operations in different scenarios inside user groups. These protocols can be adopted by many applications to achieve efficient privacy-preserving computation.3.We develop a prototype system to evaluate YANA on both mobile devices and desktop computers using real-world data. Experimental results demonstrate that, compared with state-of-the-art privacy-preserving CF approaches, YANA is much more efficient and achieves better recommendation quality.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 formulates our problem and presents a high-level overview of YANA. 4 User grouping, 5 Pseudo user management, 6 Privacy-preserving content recommendation present the details of the YANA system design, including user grouping, pseudo user management, and the privacy-preserving recommendation algorithm. Section 7 analyzes the privacy protection capabilities of YANA. Detailed experimental results are presented in 8 Experimental results, 9 Conclusion concludes this paper.
