For many years, the role of play in children's development has been widely recognized by researchers and educators. Children often play either individually or collaboratively for fun and enjoyment. Play provides a means for children to learn and explore in a more meaningful way. In a sense, play is an autotelic and voluntary act that requires intrinsic reasons (Feezell, 2010). However, when placed in the context of work or education, play is often seen as a frivolous activity. Despite such criticism, play was shown to contribute to children's social, cognitive, and emotional development (Fisher, Hirsh-Pasek, Golinkoff, & Gryfe, 2008). Additionally, Brown (2009) contends that the improvisational potential of play makes individuals less rigid in their ways of doing things and more open to change, including displaying new behaviors and thoughts.
Perhaps the most interesting behaviors that an individual displays when engaging in play are devotion and persistence. In video games, for instance, it is common for players to extend their interactive experiences with the game and persist in accomplishing their goals regardless of failure. In fact, experiencing failure has been shown to be an important element in game enjoyment (Juul, 2009). The importance of the element of enjoyment has been widely stressed in learning and education. Lack of enjoyment and boredom can be linked to disengagement and failure in learning (Shernoff, Csikszentmihalyi, Schneider, & Shernoff, 2003).
In video games, engagement is considered a replication of pleasurable associations similar to the ones experienced in childhood play where mistakes are expected and tolerated (Hoffman & Nadelson, 2010). More importantly, while also considering the complexity and multifaceted nature of the concept of engagement, empirical investigations had indicated that engagement can predict enjoyment (Lyons et al., 2014; Ryan, Rigby, & Przybylski, 2006). Thus, in various situations, notably in the academic context, engagement triggers positive emotional experiences including fun, enthusiasm, and commitment to hard work (Niemi et al., 2014). Taken in sum, learning can only take place if there is a willingness to engage and persist. But, unless the tasks are perceived enjoyable, motivation and persistence are less likely to occur (Lumby, 2011).
Facing the popularity of video games in educational settings and the complexity of player psychology, researchers had begun to investigate various factors that contribute to enjoyment, including interactivity (Klimmt, Hartmann, & Frey, 2007), suspense (Klimmt, Rizzo, Vorderer, Koch, & Fischer, 2009), competition (Vorderer, Hartmann, & Klimmt, 2003), and spatial presence and perceived reality (Shafer, Carbonara, & Popova, 2011). To date, little empirical work has been done to describe the association between individual traits and video game enjoyment, particularly in mobile game settings. In sum, the current study aims to test an integrative model that examines (1) the relationships between enjoyment and certain individual traits, notably learning styles, collaboration skills, intrinsic motivation, and game attitude and (2) the association between enjoyment and achievement. The relationships included in the model are theoretically and empirically supported to provide a more comprehensive understanding of how players’ traits can determine the level of game enjoyment rather considering single traits separately.
1.1. Individual traits and enjoymentResearchers have attempted to define the concept of enjoyment without universal consensus. In the particular context of media enjoyment, past studies have broadly defined enjoyment as a pleasure response but are still short of conceptual clarity (Tamborini, Bowman, Eden, Grizzard, & Organ, 2010). To provide a more comprehensive model to complement the hedonic components and highlight the non-hedonic aspect of the enjoyment concept, Tamborini et al. (2010) proposed and validated a model of enjoyment as need satisfaction by investigating the three basic needs in self-determination theory: autonomy, competence, and relatedness. Their findings also suggested that media enjoyment can potentially be the result of the satisfaction of intrinsic needs. Based on their study, which built on the work of Ryan et al. (2006), Tamborini et al. broadly defined media enjoyment as need satisfaction. Thus, enjoyment may not only be limited to pleasure responses of media use. The tripartite model by Nabi and Krcmar (2004) conceptualized enjoyment as an attitude and suggested cognitive, affective, and behavioral reactions to game enjoyment. That is, the type of attitude shown towards a particular media offering is a strong indicator of the extent to which the media have been enjoyed. Other concepts of video game enjoyment may also reside in control or performance itself (Grodal, 2000), flow states (Sherry, 2004), and social interactions (Gajadhar, De Kort, & Ijsselsteijn, 2008). This complex process of enjoyment goes beyond the assumption that enjoyment is merely a product of positive feelings or inputs, particularly in video games (Shafer, 2012). For instance, Oliver (2009) highlights that even media that produce negative emotions, such as sadness, can be enjoyed to some extent.There are implications within media enjoyment theories that a player's personality and enjoyment are closely related (Fang & Zhao, 2010). The study by Fang and Zhao (2010) in particular has shown that sensation seeking and self-forgetfulness, as two personality traits, may have a significant impact on computer game enjoyment among university students. To reinforce past video game studies, the present study investigates the combined effect of both attitude and intrinsic motivation on enjoyment, which previous studies have addressed separately. Additionally, this article explores other factors such as learning styles and collaboration skills that have often been overlooked as determinants of enjoyment, particularly in video games used in educational and mobile settings.1.1.1. Learning style and enjoymentThe concept of learning style, used interchangeably with cognitive style (Simpson & Du, 2004), refers to the idea that individuals are different with respect to what is considered the most effective method of instruction or study (Pashler, McDaniel, Rohrer, & Bjork, 2008). According to Cano-Garcia and Hughes (2000), it is difficult to find consensus on the definition of learning style because researchers tend to focus on one of the dimensions of the learning process. Previous studies suggest that learning performance could be improved when learning style dimensions are adequately addressed in the design of learning systems (Filippidis and Tsoukalas, 2009, Hsieh et al., 2011). For instance, it was shown that fifth graders who learned with personalized educational video games that addressed their learning styles performed better than those who used computer games that did not meet their learning styles (Hwang, Sung, Hung, Huang, & Tsai, 2012). The study by Simpson and Du (2004) explored the relationship between students' learning styles and enjoyment in a distributed learning environment and found that a student's learning style had a significant effect on student's self-reported enjoyment levels. In general, video game research has rarely explored the relationship between learning styles and enjoyment. This leads the present study to investigate the link between players' learning styles and the level of enjoyment they experience. Specifically, it is hypothesized that a student's learning style will predict the level of enjoyment in a mobile learning game.1.1.2. Collaboration skills and enjoymentCollaboration is broadly defined as a particular form of interaction that requires participants to engage mutually in a task. Players in shared virtual worlds can work collaboratively to achieve common goals, thus establishing a sense of community through social interactions. Previous studies showed that children who worked together in small groups experienced increased enjoyment (Scott, Mandryk, & Inkpen, 2003) and that flow experiences also occurred when children played video games in a group (Inal & Cagiltay, 2007). In general, collaborative gaming involves cooperation with other players to reach common goals. Some factors, such as competitiveness, allow players to demonstrate their game competence to other players (Kaye & Bryce, 2012), which can also lead to enjoyment of the experience. However, there is always the possibility of a conflict among group members as a result of different visions or strategies. That being said, it seems reasonable to assume that the level of enjoyment players get from a collaborative experience in gaming is dependent on how they perceive their skills to collaborate with others in the group. Therefore, it is hypothesized in this study that more positive collaboration skills will predict a higher level of enjoyment.1.1.3. Intrinsic motivation and enjoymentThere are many reasons to expect that intrinsic motivation might increase game enjoyment. First, players who are intrinsically motivated engage in a game task to seek enjoyment or challenge while external reward may play a little to no role in the process. In fact, Ryan and Deci (2000) suggest that individuals who are intrinsically motivated enjoy an activity more when compared to those who are extrinsically motivated. More importantly, these principles of self-determination theory have been argued to be relevant in the context of video games (Przybylski, Rigby, & Ryan, 2010). For the present study, it is predicted that players who are more intrinsically motivated will experience higher levels of enjoyment.1.1.4. Computer game attitude and enjoymentPrevious attitude studies have measured computer users' attitudes using enjoyment as a variable (Christensen and Knezek, 2001, Knezek et al., 2011). Other empirical work supported a positive relationship between perceived enjoyment and attitude towards the use of technology (Lee, 2009, Wu and Liu, 2007). Specifically, the study by Wu and Liu (2007) showed that online gaming enjoyment was a significant predictor of attitude. In the context of mobile games, Chinomona (2013) found that mobile gaming perceived enjoyment had a direct positive effect on attitude towards mobile gaming intention. Based on these findings, the present study extends on past research to investigate whether one's attitude towards video games is related to game enjoyment in the context of a mobile learning game.1.1.5. Enjoyment and achievementGaming achievements such as in-game stars or badges are often considered part of the primary reward system inside the game (Hamari & Eranti, 2011). Aabom (2014) argues that accomplishing challenging tasks and goals inside the game is considered an achievement that is player defined in nature and goes beyond the graphical representations of rewards inside the game. In other words, a task achievement brings its reward. In the context of academic achievement, Shernoff, Knauth, and Makris (2000) contend that flow experiences help students learn to enjoy the challenges that can help them achieve their goals. In a sense, enjoyment, as a learning behavior, triggers other positive behaviors such as motivation and persistence in learning. When considering a reciprocal effect, Low achievement is considered a risk factor for the enjoyment of learning (Hagenauer & Hascher, 2014). In fact, students with poor academic achievements are at risk of losing interest and motivation to learn over time because learning activities are no longer perceived enjoyable. Empirically, it was shown that a student's performance and effort were correlated with enjoyment (Schukajlow & Krug, 2014). Enjoyment was also shown to predict academic achievements (Ahmed, van der Werf, Kuyper, & Minnaert, 2013). Assuming similar relationships in video game contexts, the present study assumes that game enjoyment is associated with achievement.
1.2. Minecraft as a mobile learning game1.2.1. Introduction to MinecraftMinecraft is a multiple award-winning sandbox game that has become popular in recent years. Similar to other sandbox games, Minecraft players do not have to follow a strict linear story found in other game genres (Ocio & Brugos, 2008) and are free to roam and explore the virtual worlds they build out of blocks with almost no constraints (Bebbington & Vellino, 2015). In addition to the endless possibilities offered by creative play within the virtual worlds of Minecraft, the gameplay also revolves around collaboration, exploration, and adventure (Zorn, Wingrave, Charbonneau, & LaViola, 2013). Players can either play individually or collaboratively with other players in two game modes: creative and survival. In creative mode, players face no threats and can use their creativity to build and design different structures ranging from simple building to more complex structures and cities using the unlimited resources at their disposal. In survival mode, on the other hand, a player must survive hostile environments and the life-threatening creatures or “mobs” at night by creating structures for shelter and crafting items to battle the mobs while managing health and hunger to survive the game. However, since Minecraft does not include a manual of how to play the game, players are often required to search and locate online resources for information (Thompson, 2014). YouTube, for instance, has proven to be a popular social platform for Minecraft players to share their work on replicated real world environments and to receive feedback (Morelli, 2015). The importance of peer feedback in a Minecraft community, according to Morelli (2015), may play a role in the popularity of the game since feedback, not score, is what motivates good players to perform at a high level.1.2.2. Minecraft's characteristics as an educational toolAt its core, Minecraft is an open-ended game that offers its users a great deal of freedom and flexibility in how to play the game. When used as a learning tool, it can be accessible and appealing to almost everyone including technology laggards because of the simplistic lego-like concept of play that requires minimum instructions to play. In addition to allowing students to express their curiosity through investigation, research, and creation (Wernholm & Vigmo, 2015), Minecraft incorporates certain characteristics of game-based learning environments that give players a sense of ownership and provides tools to express creativity (Duncan, 2011). Similar to many educational video games, Minecraft allows students to play a more active role and to be part of the learning environment rather than passively listening to more experienced individuals (Sáez-López, Miller, Vázquez-Cano, & Domínguez-Garrido, 2015).Brand and Kinash (2013) highlight two potential learning objectives when Minecraft is used as an educational tool: an affinity space and a simulation environment. An affinity space, according to Gee (2004), is an informal learning environment where participants are engaged through shared interests and goals and where both newbies and experts can share a single space. Participants in affinity spaces learn based on their purposes and identities while bridging gaps around participants’ age and technology levels, unlike in traditional classroom settings where students are often segregated by grades or skills (Gee, 2004). The second potential learning objective when using Minecraft as a learning and teaching tool is the creation of a simulation environment. At the present time, educators are using Minecraft as a virtual environment in STEM subjects to provide visual illustrations of different scientific concepts such as the features of body cells (Brand & Kinash, 2013). Minecraft is also used in other subjects such as art, geography, and history where students can design and build structures and buildings of different historical eras while advancing their artistic skills.Another positive educational feature of Minecraft is promoting an information-seeking behavior among students. In fact, to play the game more efficiently, players are encouraged to seek information not only within the game environment but also through external resources such as discussion forums, video tutorials, and blogs (Bebbington & Vellino, 2015). Moreover, because of the open-ended nature and the sandbox design of the game, Minecraft can also be modified to address core academic standards (List & Bryant, 2014).1.2.3. The various educational usages of MinecraftVideo games can potentially change the existing educational landscape as we know it (Williamson, Squire, Halverson, & Gee, 2005). The virtual worlds provide a possibility to develop situated understanding through which learners can experience more concrete realities and draw connections between abstract concepts and real-world problems (Williamson et al., 2005). In video games, like Minecraft, there is more emphasis on playful exploration than on mastery since players can learn the game basics in less time then proceed immediately to match purpose with scale (Brand & Kinash, 2013). In addition to fostering a collaborative behavior, video games can promote higher-order thinking and social skills (Dondlinger, 2007, Steinkuehler and Duncan, 2008). More importantly, using Minecraft as an environment for game-based learning provides opportunities to create an immersive and interactive curriculum (Sáez-López et al., 2015).There are many modifications (also known as mods) that are available and shared in the Minecraft gaming community that players can use to change game environments and playing experience (Morelli, 2015). Both educators and learners alike have a variety of virtual environments they can use as a learning contexts to design learning activities without having to create and build virtual environments from scratch, especially if building and designing environments is not the intended outcome. Regarding classroom use, Minecraft can be utilized as a cross-curricular learning tool. Morelli (2015) reports how Minecraft was used to promote active learning including teaching students about online behavior and how to design buildings from the Roman Empire era. Minecraft, according to Short (2012), is also used in other disciplines such as biology, ecology, math, physics, chemistry, and geology and geography. In biology, for example, players can create custom textures to help visualize and investigate different functions within the human body including cellular activity. In Chemistry, MineChem is an example of a modification that is available for free. This 3-dimensional representation of the periodic table of elements provides information on important uses and properties of the elements using sign posts (Short, 2012). While it is evident that Minecraft can be a useful teaching tool in different subjects and disciplines, the open-ended concept provides a tool for educators to express their creativity equally while designing various instructional activities.MinecraftEdu is the educational version of the game that was developed specifically to bring the Minecraft experience to the classroom. This release provides new and enhanced features that allow teachers to supervise students while in play and to freeze or mute students to redirect their attention to the teacher when giving instructions. According to MinecraftEdu website, more than 5500 educators in over 40 countries have used this educational version of Minecraft for different subjects ranging from STEM to history and art.Some studies have explored the potential of teaching programming in Minecraft environments (Wilkinson, Williams, & Armstrong, 2013, pp. 371–382; Zorn et al., 2013). For example, a robot control programming language in Minecraft called CodeBlocks was shown to improve non-programmers and Minecraft players’ perceptions of programming in general (Zorn et al., 2013). A similar study by Wilkinson et al. (2013, pp. 371–382) found that 69% of Minecraft workshop participants (primarily female) who previously indicated no desire to pursue a career in computer science changed their mind in a post-survey as a result of exploring the “fun” side of programming. Wilkinson et al. (2013, pp. 371–382) also maintained that the increasing number of modifications in Minecraft has provided an array of possibilities, particularly when teaching and learning programming.
