Cloud computing (cloud) offers scalable, on-demand service, cost reduction, resilience, and available network access services to its customers. Many studies explored implementing reactive and proactive security mechanisms to improve the security of the cloud computing resources and services Jia et al. (2014); Zhu et al. (2012), but there is a lack of knowledge to evaluate how the security posture of the cloud changes when multiple security mechanisms are used in combinations. As a result, there may be new vulnerabilities arising from unexpected dependencies or conflicts created when using multiple security mechanisms together Aikat et al. (2017). Since cloud customers rely on the service provider for various services including data storage, infrastructure and services, security issues must be addressed for the customers to fully trust on cloud services offered by public and private cloud providers (e.g. Microsoft Azure, Amazon Web Service (AWS), Google Cloud, and so forth). Moving Target Defense (MTD) is a proactive defensive security solution in which it makes attack surface dynamic, unpredictable, and intricate for attackers Cho et al. (2020); Peng et al. (2014); Zhang, Lei, Chang, Yang, 2017, Zhang, Li, Bai, Yu, Zang, 2012. Unlike the traditional security approaches that rely on detecting and removing vulnerabilities, MTD techniques aim to increase the attack efforts so that the attackers need to spend more resource (e.g., times and costs) to exploit the target system. However, most proposed MTD techniques evaluate their effectiveness using different evaluation methods. Thus, it is difficult to understand how the effectiveness of techniques changes when multiple MTD techniques are used together.
Hong et al. Hong and Kim (2016b) classified MTD techniques into three categories: Shuffle (moving or re-arranging of the resources) Jafarian et al. (2012); Vikram et al. (2013), Redundancy (replication of resources) Gorbenko et al. (2009); Yuan et al. (2013) and Diversity (replacing different variants of a component or a resource with the same functionality) Newell et al. (2015); Rohrer et al. (2014). MTD techniques can be adopted in different cloud’s deployment layers such as application, virtualization, hardware layers Cho et al. (2020). For instance, Virtual Machine Live Migration (VM-LM) is a Shuffle technique in the virtualization layer. VM-LM is a feature on the clouds which can be enabled by the cloud provider and a VM can migrate from one physical host to another one Moon et al. (2015). The main goal of deploying VM-LM is to increase uncertainty for the attackers (e.g. to make information gathered by the attacker useless and obsolete). Moreover, VM replication is an example of Redundancy technique in the virtualization layer of the cloud through which different replicas of a VM can be created so that each replica has the same feature as the main VM. VM replication increases the reliability of the cloud by creating redundant VMs (e.g. crucial servers) so that if any crucial VM is compromised, others can provide the same services leading to high service quality for the users. OS diversification is a Diversity technique in the virtualization layer which can replace a VM’s instance by another instance or image Alavizadeh et al. (2019a).
MTD techniques can be used individually or in combinations. Combining different MTD techniques would potentially benefit by grasping the strong points of each technique and can introduce additional benefits (such as enhancing security and decreasing the system interruption) which may not be possible under deployment of a single MTD technique. For instance, Redundancy techniques can be used to increase the service availability (fewer service interruption) and can be measured with system Reliability, while other MTD techniques like Shuffle are used to increase the security of a system. However, if Redundancy is not properly deployed, it may incur economic cost to the cloud providers and also it may increase the attack surface. Thus, MTD techniques can be well-mingled together aiming to increase both security and reliability. However, combining MTD techniques may not necessarily improve the security of the system, because the operations of deployed MTD techniques may conflict. For example, application diversity to variate attack paths may become ineffective if a host shuffling technique changes the attack path. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to evaluate the combinations of the MTD techniques Alavizadeh et al. (2018a). The economic impact of deploying MTD techniques on the cloud providers does not mean that the specific MTD technique should not be deployed or combined with the other MTD techniques at all. However, it needs more investigation to find a trade-off between the economic impacts against security achievements. Considering and evaluating all combinations of all MTD techniques over the system’s layers makes the scope too large. In this paper, we only focus on combining the two Shuffle and Redundancy MTD techniques. The investigation and evaluation of other combinations including Diversity techniques is out of scope of this paper and is presented in Alavizadeh, Alavizadeh, Kim, Jang-Jaccard, Torshiz, 2019, Alavizadeh, Jang-Jaccard, Kim, 2018.
When it comes to the real cloud, deploying MTD techniques depends on the constraints defined by the cloud providers. For instance, for deploying OS diversification or VM replication (as a redundancy technique) on the cloud, the cloud providers need to run new VM instances which may cost the cloud providers. However, in this paper, we focus on theoretical appraisal and formalism and only consider theoretical analysis and evaluation through simulation to evaluate the effectiveness of combining MTD techniques. However, we considered the feasibility, adaptability, and usability of those MTD techniques on a realistic private cloud Uni (0000) in our work presented in Alavizadeh et al. (2019b) which showed that MTD techniques Shuffle and Redundancy can be deployed on a real cloud platform with low effect in performance in terms of system downtime.
Graphical Security Models (GSM), such as Attack Graphs (AGs) Sheyner et al. (2002) or Attack Trees (ATs) Schneier (2000), can be used to formally assess the security of systems and networks  Hong et al. (2017); Kordy et al. (2014). They utilize various security metrics to represent the security posture of the system (e.g. System risk, reliability, Attack Cost, etc.), which can provide different aspects of a system’s security Yusuf et al. (2017). Consequently, MTD techniques can be incorporated and modeled using GSMs to assess their effectiveness Hong and Kim (2016b). This helps to find better strategies and formulate the possible optimal MTD solutions before deploying them. However, there is a lack of studies on how MTD techniques can be combined, especially in the context of the cloud. Many studies proposed new MTD techniques at different layers. However, a few of them focused on evaluating the effectiveness of combined MTD method on the infrastructure layer of the cloud. Moreover, most of the proposed literature on MTD have not investigated on comprehensive security analysis using GSMs (like AG, AT, HARM, etc.) to compute important security metrics.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose methods to evaluate the combinations of MTD techniques, taking into account the Shuffle and Redundancy, using a GSM named HARM Hong and Kim (2016a).
The earlier version of this paper is given in Alavizadeh et al. (2017), and in addition of the investigations we have already made in the earlier version, we made new contributions which, to the best of our knowledge, has not been researched by other works. The new contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
•We provide the formal definitions for the MTD techniques Shuffle (S) and Redundancy (R) and the combinations of these two (S+R) explicitly as the functions applied on HARM and provide the pseudocodes for each MTD technique with regards to the defined formalism;•We present and formalize the system unattackability metric as an additional component to investigate the effect of deploying S+R. We demonstrate that the combination of two MTD techniques, such as S+R, contributes the likelihood to increase the system Unattackability;•We conduct a regression analysis between two Network Centrality Measures (NCMs) Betweenness and Closeness against Shuffle, Redundancy, and S+R. We conclude that there is a strong relationship between the two NCMs and the Redundancy technique alone but no other MTD techniques;•We include a small scale cloud system to help for understand the formalization and calculation steps. Besides the small scale cloud example, we used a larger cloud-band model, as the cloud example in a larger scales for more in-depth analysis. We utilize Firewall Decision Diagram (FDD) to concretely demonstrate the way the connectivity among network components are captured under this system. We show how this insight is used for the HARM construction.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we define the necessary concepts, definitions, mathematical notations, and propose formalisms for MTD techniques. In Section 3, we analyze the MTD techniques using the HARM. Discussion and limitations of the current study are presented in Section 4. A review of the related work is summarized in Section 5. Finally, the paper concludes in Section 6.
