Solving conservation problems requires both scientific data and public support for conservation actions, and generating this support often requires broad engagement with the public (Opdam and Wascher, 2004, Cooper et al., 2007, Pressey et al., 2007). Informal education is an important avenue for engaging the public with both science and nature, and often takes place in natural history museums, zoos or aquariums, which a majority of American adults report visiting (Falk and Dierking, 2010). Informal learning is an important avenue for science education among adults (Falk and Dierking, 2010) and is also a strategy for maintaining support for conservation (Ballard et al., 2017, Ballantyne et al., 2007).
Citizen science, engaging non-professional volunteers in scientific research (Bonney et al., 2009, Tulloch et al., 2013), has been advanced as a method to collect ecological data at large-scales (Miller-Rushing et al., 2012) as well as an effective form of informal education about the natural world (Cooper et al., 2007, Dickinson et al., 2012). There is still some question whether citizen science projects can achieve simultaneous goals of data collection and education (Jordan et al., 2011), although several projects have combined data collection with informal education (Ballard et al., 2017, Jordan et al., 2011). Understanding volunteer motivations and establishing explicit education goals can improve informal education outcomes (Domroese & Johnson, 2017), but there is evidence that even without explicit learning goals, volunteers can learn about ecology and science simply through the experience of rigorous data collection (Ballard et al., 2017, Jordan et al., 2009). Projects that are collecting data for scientific research offer experience with “authentic science” that provides unique informal education opportunities (Jordan et al., 2012b) that can be easily supplemented with additional educational activities.
Citizen science is unique in that in can provide a vehicle to directly experience the natural world as well as offering informal education. Direct experience with nature may be a useful tool to encourage support for conservation. As the world has become increasingly urbanized (Alig et al., 2004, Cohen, 2006) the public in industrialized countries has spent less time engaged in nature-based recreation (Pergams and Zaradic, 2006, Pergams and Zaradic, 2008). Children, and particularly urban children, are spending much less time outdoors than previous generations (Louv, 2008). This trend of reduced interaction with the natural world may negatively impact current and future support for conservation (Miller, 2005), and there is already evidence that the decline in some types of outdoor recreation is impacting support for non-governmental organizations that are focused on conservation (Zaradic et al., 2009). Citizen science offers one strategy to combat this trend and provide meaningful interactions with the natural world as well give volunteers experience with science, and often science that is focused on conservation.
To evaluate the possible effects of citizen science on support for conservation, we investigated the effects of volunteering for a large wildlife ecology project. We evaluated volunteer experience, learning outcomes, and possible changes to conservation attitudes before and after a wildlife study on the effects of recreation on mammals using eMammal. eMammal is a platform for gathering, storing, and sharing survey data of mammals collected with camera traps (McShea et al., 2016). Camera traps are motion-triggered cameras that photograph any animal larger than ~ 100 g that moves through the sensor field. The goals of eMammal are to provide tools for large-scale camera trapping for researchers and citizen scientists and to maintain a data repository of mammal survey data that can be easily and quickly accessed for conservation and management. We assessed the quality of volunteer data and how quickly volunteers learned to place cameras and identify wildlife pictures through expert review of all photos identified by volunteers. The effectiveness of project activities in changing volunteer attitudes, knowledge and behavior were assessed with pre and post-season surveys of volunteers and control groups. We predicted that volunteers would: 1) improve their ability to setup cameras and identify species over time; 2) increase their knowledge about the natural history of mammals; 3) improve attitudes toward conservation; 4) share information learned during or from the project with more people in their networks, and 5) be more likely to share information if they detected rare or charismatic wildlife, such as predators, on their camera traps.
