Intelligent vehicles require accurate and reliable self- localization systems. Accurate, because an exact pose estimate enables complex functionalities such as automatic lane following or collision avoidance in the first place. Reliable, because the quality of the pose estimate must be maintained independently of environmental factors in order to ensure safety.
Satellite-based localization systems like RTK-GPS or DGPS seem to be an efficient solution, since they achieve centimeter-level accuracy out of the box. However, they lack reliability. Especially in urban areas, buildings that obstruct the line of sight between the vehicle and the satellites can decrease accuracy to several meters [1], [2]. Localization on the basis of dense maps like grid maps, point clouds, or polygon meshes represents a more reliable alternative [3], [4]. On the downside, dense approaches require massive amounts of memory that quickly become prohibitive for maps on larger scales. This is where landmark maps come into play: By condensing billions of raw sensor data points into a comparably small number of salient features, they can decrease the memory footprint by several orders of magnitude [5].
But high memory efficiency is not the only advantage feature-based maps bring with them. They also abstract from sensor modality. That means that feature maps can be generated based on the input of any suitable sensor or combination of sensors, a fact that is particularly beneficial when localizing a robot using sensors of different modalities. Moreover, by extracting landmarks from data points, feature-based maps can improve mapping and localization robustness, as can be seen in a simple example: While dense maps are strongly affected by seasonal changes like tree foliage, a map based on tree trunk features or poles stays invariant under this type of change.
In this work, we present a study of long-term 2-D vehicle localization in urban environments that relies on a novel approach to extract pole landmarks from mobile lidar data. Poles occur as parts of street lamps, traffic signs, as bollards and tree trunks. They are ubiquitous in urban areas, long-term stable and invariant under seasonal and weather changes. Since their geometric shape is well-defined, too, poles are well suited to serve as landmarks that enable accurate and reliable localization.
Our localization process is subdivided into a mapping and a localization phase. During mapping, we use the pole detector presented below to extract pole landmarks from lidar scans and register them with a global map via a given ground-truth vehicle trajectory. During localization, we employ a particle filter to estimate the vehicle pose by aligning the pole detections from live sensor data with those in the map. Fig. 1 shows an exemplary localization result.
We are not the first ones to propose this kind of localization technique: The next section provides an overview over the numerous related works. However, to the best of our knowledge, we are the first ones to present a pole detector that does not only consider the laser ray endpoints, but also the free space in between the laser sensor and the endpoints, and to demonstrate reliable and accurate vehicle localization based on a map of pole landmarks on large time scales. While related works usually evaluate localization performance on a short sample trajectory of at most a few minutes length, we successfully put our approach to the test on a publicly available long-term dataset that contains 35 hours of data recorded over the course of 15 months — including varying routes, construction zones, seasonal and weather changes, and lots of dynamic objects. Additional control experiments show that the presented method is not only reliable, but significantly outperforms a recently published state-of-the-art approach in terms of accuracy, too.Download : Download high-res image (362KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Pole landmark map created from the NCLT dataset [2] and trajectory of an experimental run 15 months after map creation. The blue dots represent the landmarks. The gray line corresponds to the ground-truth trajectory. Most of it is covered by the red line, which represents the estimate produced by the presented method. The mean position difference between both trajectories, formally defined in Section 4.1, amounts to 0.31 m. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
