HLRS, the High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart, is the first national high performance computing center in Germany, inaugurated in June 1996. As a research and service institution affiliated to the University of Stuttgart it is offering services to academic users and to industry. Since 2004, HLRS is also serving European users through the projects DEISA (Distributed European Infrastructure for Supercomputing Applications), HPC-Europa and PRACE (Partnership for Advanced Computing in Europe). Since its foundation in 2007 HLRS is a member of the German Gauss Center for Supercomputing (GCS).
In autumn 2015, HLRS has installed the latest of its HPC flagship systems, Hazel Hen, a CRAY XC 40 which is provided as a German national resource and as a European Tier-0 system. When planning for a new system, the main goal of HLRS is always to find the best tool for the HLRS users’ needs. The HLRS flagship system has typically about 800 – 1000 users in about 100 different projects with about 80 projects active at any given time. The users are coming from different scientific disciplines, but users of the engineering field are forming the majority. Main areas of users’ research are aeroacoustics, aerodynamics, astrophysics, bioinformatics, combustion, fluid-structure interaction, helicopter aerodynamics, meteorology, medical imaging, nanotechnology, solid state physics, turbo machinery and turbulence phenomena.
In addition, industrial users are making good use of the system. Several companies from the Stuttgart region and beyond are using the available environment for their benefit. Traditionally, the majority of companies is working in the automotive and engineering area. But, an increasing number of customers is active in media.
In this paper, we will introduce the architecture of Hazel Hen and why we have chosen this platform. We will show how the scientific community has already profited from the resource and how Hazel Hen has impacted research. In addition, we will present the industrial uptake of the technology in different fields.
