Digital textile printing is a new technology to make ink-designs on textiles, which began in the late 1990s to replace traditional analogue screen-printing [1], [2], [3]. Compared with analogue screen-printing, digital textile printing is simpler and generates fewer emissions because it skips the processes of color separation, drawing and screen preparation [4]. Digital textile printing makes it possible to create fabrics with vibrant colors, photo-quality images and personalized designs [5]. However, textile printing products are considered low-end in comparison with non-planar fabrics (e.g., embroidery, lace) due to the latter's grains and luster contrasts. The problem is that non-planar fabric products are limited in terms of colors and efficiency.
To produce colorful and lavish fabrics with solid texture patterns, approaches to combining non-planar fabrics and printing have been studied for over two decades. The tremendous challenge is how to achieve a perfect alignment of fabric with ink-design, considering the deformability of fabric. Apparatus and methods using hoops have been proposed to ensure accurate alignment between the screen-printing and automatic embroidery machines [6], [7]. Kuki et al. [8] designed embroidery sewing machines that allow both embroidery and print images to be formed on the workpiece cloth.
However, there are two main drawbacks to the existing approaches. First, specific apparatus are proposed for embroidery, which cannot be generalized to different fabrics. Second, these methods require significant human intervention.
In contrast to previous works, this paper presents a novel fine-grained digital printing system based on image registration technology [9], [10] that produces digital ink-designs on non-planar fabrics. This solution consists of specific hardware and suitable algorithms to overcome the deformability of fabric (as shown in Fig. 1). The key hardware components in the proposed printing system include an industrial camera, an LED, a computer and a digital textile printer. In this paper, algorithms are proposed to align the ink-design pattern with the fabric pattern. The basic idea of this solution is to take pictures of the fabric, employ image registration-based computer vision technology to deform the ink-design pattern according to the deformability of the fabric, and print the deformed ink-design pattern onto the fabric. Using the proposed system, customized fabrics on which the fabric pattern and the ink-design pattern are perfectly matched can be obtained. The proposed system is more flexible, highly automated and makes mass production possible.Download : Download high-res image (451KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. An example shows that direct printing cannot achieve satisfying results. The ink-design pattern does not align perfectly with the stitch contours.
Regarding the proposed printing system, there are several key challenges to be addressed, including a new processing flow to produce customized fabrics and several algorithms to align the fabric pattern with the ink-design pattern in real time.1 As far as known, the proposed system is the first to combine digital textile printing and non-planar fabrics precisely to produce new customized fabrics.
The main contributions can be summarized as follows:
(i)A novel fine-grained digital printing system which combines digital textile printing and non-planar fabrics to produce new customized fabrics.(ii)A new processing flow to produce customized fabrics on which fabric patterns and ink-design patterns are perfectly matching.(iii)Several algorithms to perfectly align non-planar fabrics (e.g., embroidery, lace, etc.) with ink-design patterns.
