The Next Generation Science Standards (NRC, 2011) and the 2015 science framework for the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) (OECD, 2013) have both stressed the importance of learners possessing adequate knowledge of practices associated with scientific inquiry. An important aim of science education is to foster scientifically literate persons who possess competencies of explaining phenomena scientifically, evaluating and designing scientific inquiry, and interpreting data and evidence scientifically. Many curricula and instructional approaches have been developed to promote students' inquiry abilities, such as the Inquiry Training Model (Suchman, 1962), Predict–Observe–Explain (White & Gunstone, 1992), the Inquiry Cycle (White & Frederiksen, 1998), and the Investigation Web (Krajcik et al., 1998). Many of these inquiry instructions are built upon computer-based learning environments (CBLEs) to make unattainable or observed phenomena, such as topics of environmental science, accessible to learners. In addition, the characteristics of CBLEs such as open-endedness, incorporating multiple representational formats (e.g., text, graphics, animations, and pictures or video tools) can be used to provide learners with rich inquiry experiences.
Achieving successful inquiry in a CBLE requires learners to employ effective regulatory strategies to process information and solve problems (Azevedo, 2005, Azevedo, 2007, Crowley et al., 2010) as well as to cope with the systematic characteristics of CBLEs (Devolder, van Braak, Tondeur, & J, 2012). Students may experience cognitive overload or a feeling of being lost if they lack certain skills to help them work efficiently with an inquiry task and the CBLE. Various scaffolds have thus been developed to assist students to manage the complexity of inquiry learning situations in CBLEs (e.g., Hsu, 2008, Hsu et al., 2015, Krajcik et al., 2000, Reiser et al., 2001).
The literature shows that embedding metacognitive supports in inquiry curricula can promote the learning of conceptual understanding and inquiry abilities (e.g., Quintana et al., 2005, White and Frederiksen, 1998, White and Frederiksen, 2005). In addition, combining conceptual and metacognitive prompts has been found to be more effective than using merely conceptual prompts in facilitating the development of inquiry ability (e.g., Zhang, Hsu, Wang, & Ho, 2015). Despite the fact that numerous studies have designed scaffolds for fostering learning regulation (see Devolder, van Braak, & Tondeur, 2012 for a systematic review), little attention has been paid to understanding how learner characteristics, other than prior knowledge, may be associated with the effect of scaffolds; in addition, little is known regarding whether learners respond to the scaffolds differently, and therefore yield different learning outcomes. While knowing that the combination of cognitive and metacognitive supports is potentially more effective, more needs to be known regarding how each type of scaffold affects the subsequent learning processes and outcomes. In addition, the effect of fading on the process of regulation is worth exploring.
The present study investigated ninth-graders’ actions in response to a set of integrated cognitive (CPs) and metacognitive prompts (MPs) that were designed to support learning inquiry in a CBLE. Patterns of learners' metacognitive actions in response to CPs and MPs as well as their performance on inquiry practice were examined with two aims. The first was to understand whether and how learners respond to a set of integrated CPs and MPs, and whether the differences in their behavioral patterns lead to differences in their learning inquiry practice. Second, the effect of fading on the process of regulation was examined. We addressed these two aims using the lag sequential analysis technique.
