Wealth inequality has become an increasingly prevalent issue in the present-day developed world, including the United States. Executives and technological innovators have enjoyed vast financial success while the majority of workers outside of the technological industry continue to suffer from stagnant wages and rising costs of living. In Silicon Valley, the heart of the American tech boom, the median annual income reached a staggering $94,000 in 2013, which is almost twice the national median of $53,000. This occurred in an economy in which 31% of jobs pay $16 or less per hour and the poverty rate hovers at around 19% (Rotman, 2013). Consequently, a 2013 report published by the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) named ‘technical change’ as one of the primary factors driving income inequality (United Nations Development Programme, 2013).
In addition to a plethora of academic sources, significant attention has been directed to studies conducted by Bakhshi and Osborne (2015) and Fadel (2014). These studies employed various similar mathematical models to identify the creativity inherent in hundreds of occupations and predict the likelihood for their computerization. The vast majority of these models were based on extrapolations of historical job data, particularly from the Industrial Revolution. In order to predict various plausible future economic landscapes, the aforementioned studies rationally adopted the rational assumption that the course of human economic development would proceed in a similar manner as in the past. Furthermore, the development of such observable predictive models should help governments and economists to plan for the most desirable future. In the present study, both optimist and pessimist outlooks regarding technological unemployment were assessed, and a composite forecast was formulated. In addition, various government intervention methods were investigated in order to identify potential solutions to growing technological unemployment.
This study aims to assess the extent to which technological change has affected and may continue to affect the economic landscape of the developed world. It is hypothesized that although technological change may prove to be detrimental for many careers if left neglected, suitable government intervention and modified education practices will usher in radical new career opportunities that are better suited to an increasingly global computerized economy. Therefore, we develop an analytical model with Markov chains and present various simulated future scenarios predicting the proportions of jobs that are either susceptible or non-susceptible to computerization.
