The past decade has witnessed a remarkable growth of interest and research efforts in 3D surface registration, ranging from computer vision field [1], [2], [3] to medical imaging field [4], [5]. Given two metric surfaces (S1, g1) and (S2, g2) with Riemannian metrics, the surface registration problem is to find an optimal one-to-one correspondence mapping f: S1 → S2 between the surfaces.
Landmark-free surface registration has been studied to obtain one-to-one correspondence between surfaces without landmark constraints. A variety of algorithms have been developed to acquire these surface registrations, including shape information-based methods [6], [7], conformal mapping-based methods which minimize the angle distortion [8], [9], and quasi-conformal mapping-based methods which minimize the maximal dilation of the mapping [10], [11].
Compared with landmark-free surface registration algorithms which cannot match landmark features, the landmark-constrained surface registration algorithms have been proposed to obtain a one-to-one correspondence between surfaces that matches landmark features. However, hard constraints may cause flipping in the mapping where diffeomorphism is not guaranteed. It is still a challenging problem to obtain a robust and bijective surface registration which can match landmarks consistently, especially when two surfaces undergo non-isometric large deformations.
Motivated by the above problem, we propose a novel method of robust registration for surfaces with large deformations and landmark constraints based on both optimal mass transport mapping (OMT-Map) and Teichmüller mapping (T-Map). The main idea behind this is to employ OMT-Map to achieve an area preserving mapping which maps source and target surfaces to a unit planar disk without large area distortion. Then the surface registration problem is converted to computing a landmark-matching T-Map between two planar disks such that the maximal conformality distortion is minimized while the mapping has uniform conformality distortion over the whole domain. In order to compute the T-Map efficiently and effectively, we propose an iterative algorithm in which an optimal Beltrami coefficient is obtained. The registration method proposed in this work is not only robust, but also guarantees diffeomorphism and landmark constraints for surfaces with large deformations.
1.1. Related workIn recent decades, 3D surface registration methods have been intensively investigated. Conformal mapping based surface registration methods [12], [13] map surfaces conformally to 2D canonical domains and boil 3D surface registration problem down to 2D image registration problem. These methods can minimize the angle distortion, while they may induce large area distortion. Quasi-conformal mapping based surface registration methods have also been proposed to tackle large-scale nonrigid deformations. The Beltrami holomorphic flow method [14] was presented to compute a unique surface quasi-conformal map. By adjusting Beltrami coefficients, surface diffeomorphisms are equivalently adjusted to obtain the optimal map with desired properties. In [15], a novel surface registration method based on quasi-conformal mapping was also proposed. This method extracts the features on the surfaces, then estimates the Beltrami coefficient, and finally uniquely determines the registration mapping by solving Beltrami equations using curvature flow. Compared with our proposed method, however, both conformal mapping based and quasi-conformal mapping based methods cannot avoid area distortion.Landmark features are usually needed to guide surface registration. Landmark-constrained surface registration has also been extensively studied. Among computer vision research efforts, an iterative algorithm based on Möbius Voting [16] was proposed to compute point correspondences between surfaces that are approximately partially isometric. However, it cannot guarantee the diffeomorphism. An optimization method based on landmark-constrained basis [17] was presented to establish full surface registration and geodesic deformation between two surfaces. In medical imaging field, Auzias et al. [18] introduced a brain registration method using a quasi-exhaustive set of sulci as landmarks. Joshi et al. [19] proposed an algorithm by extending landmark matching to the large deformation setting insuring the generation of diffeomorphisms, which was applied to brain registration. Recently, Su et al. [20] proposed an OMT-Map based registration method. It composes the optimal mass transport map with the conformal map to obtain the unique area-preserving map, which is intrinsic to the Riemannian metric. This area-preserving map in conjunction with harmonic map was then used for surface registration, which avoids the large area distortion that conformal mapping may cause. Nevertheless, this method cannot guarantee the diffeomorphism. By contrast, our proposed method can not only guarantee the diffeomorphism, but also is capable of minimizing the conformality distortion.Compared with existing surface registration methods, e.g., the conformal mapping based method and OMT-Map based method, our proposed surface registration method is more advantageous: the OMT-Map which is employed in our method enforces the robustness by avoiding large area distortion; the T-Map in our method produces the diffeomorphism with all the landmarks matched consistently.
1.2. ContributionTo the best of our knowledge, this work is the first one to propose the use of OMT-Map and T-Map to compute robust and unique bijective registration for surfaces with large deformations and landmark constraints. The major contribution of this work is the introduction of a novel surface registration framework based on the composition of T-Map with OMT-Map. It is advantageous due to the following merits:
•Robustness.
The conventional conformal mapping-based surface registration method can preserve local shapes(i.e.,conformal) but may introduce large area distortions which exceed machine precision, resulting in problems and failure of surface registration. In contrast, our method is capable of constructing an area-preserving mapping which avoids large area distortion. Moreover, existing methods focus on registering near-isometric or near-conformal surfaces. In contrast, our method is capable of handling surfaces with large deformations, because of the flexibility of Teichmüller map. In theory, for any pair of homeomorphic surfaces with quite different geometries, there exists a unique Teichmüller map between them, which is diffeomorphic and minimizes the angle distortion. Thus our method is more robust.•Diffeomorphism.
In [20], the surface registration for landmark constraints is based on a harmonic mapping, which may encounter overlaps (flipping) although landmarks can be matched consistently. Thus, it is possible that diffeomorphism is not guaranteed. Compared with that method, this work proposes to compute a unique T-Map with landmark constraints such that diffeomorphism is guaranteed.•Minimal conformality distortion.
The algorithm for computation of T-Map in this work is to determine an optimal one-to-one correspondence for registration with landmark constraints. The computed T-Map can minimize the maximal conformality distortion and achieve uniform conformality distortion over the whole domain.
