On Saturday 29 May 2010 a hacker calling himself ‘Kaka Argentine’ hacked into the Ugandan State House website and posted a conspicuous picture of Adolf Hitler with the swastika, a Nazi Party symbol. The picture was posted below that of President Museveni meeting with a Member of Parliament. The State House staff struggled for 24 hours to remove that picture and only succeeded in doing so at 4:00 pm Sunday.1 A year earlier, in March 2009, Uganda's defence ministry website had been closed after hackers calling themselves “the Ayyildiz team” hacked into the site and published anti-Israel messages on it.2 These two incidents are examples of the use of hacking as a form of protest to achieve political ends in Uganda.
Uganda is a small developing landlocked East African country with a population of 34.6 million people.3 As of June 2016 the estimated number of Internet subscribers was 7,461,035 and Internet users were 14,564,660 placing Internet penetration at 39.8%.4 Computer based social networking sites such as Facebook, WhatsApp and Twitter now have a large number of subscribers in Uganda.5 E-commerce has grown in Uganda as Internet banking, offering speed and convenience in financial transactions, has become increasingly popular with most banks introducing it6 and the number of web-based businesses in the country is on the rise.7 Most of the large corporations in Uganda today maintain a website and many other businesses advertise online in one form or another.8 The widespread use of computers has enabled the government of Uganda to adapt the emerging concept of ‘e-Government’. This is the ‘use of information and communication technologies to deliver public services in a convenient, efficient customer-oriented and cost-effective way.’9 Under ‘e-Government’, public services are delivered via the Internet, telephone, electronic media, community centres, wireless devices or other communications systems.10 Most government ministries and agencies have websites most of which have an interactive component that enables citizens to communicate to the government. Government agencies such as Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and the National Registration and Identification Authority as well as ministries like the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Lands are now using computer systems to improve their efficiency.11
The all-pervading digital age has affected virtually every facet of our lives and ‘hacktivists’ argue that this applies to the effective modes of protest available. This paper examines whether there is legal room for hacking as a legitimate form of protest in Uganda's legal regime, particularly under article 29 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, which guarantees freedom of expression. The legitimacy of hacktivism is examined in light of the criminalisation of hacking under the Computer Misuse Act (CMA). The paper argues that as the legal regime stands today, the common forms of hacktivism have no constitutional protection and are legally indistinguishable from hacking. However, it goes on to conclude that as cyberspace takes over as the new public space, particularly with the government's and large corporations' efforts to build a massive cyber presence, the law will have to adapt to accommodate the less destructive forms of cyber protests.
The paper proceeds in four parts. Section 2 examines the phenomenon of hacking and hacktivism distinguishing the motives of the two activities. The section also looks at the different forms of hacktivism and their consequences. Section 3 analyses the provisions of the Computer Misuse Act that criminalise the various forms of hacktivism and the justification for the criminalisation. Section 4 examines hacktivism as a form of protest and the extent to which it is protected under article 29. Section 5 gives the conclusion of the paper.
