Traditionally, digital forensics has focused on hard disk images. Since about 2004 however, the general knowledge and availability of hard disk encryption software like TrueCrypt, Bitlocker and Filevault has complicated the situation. The forensic standard of pulling the mains plug to freeze the state of a computer as described in 2004 (Casey, 2004) is no longer valid in 2015, although several documents do not describe an alternative course of action (SWGDE, 2014a, SWGDE, 2014b).
The content of Random Access Memory (RAM) of a computer contains forensically relevant information (Halderman et al., 2009), most notably encryption keys. However actually acquiring can be challenging (Gruhn and Müller, 2013).
When encountering a live system that is locked with a password the examiner should asses the risks of pulling the mains plug. He must make assumptions on the evidential value and the possible anti-forensics on the live system like encryption and booby traps. Based on this assessment he should choose whether to pull the plug or perform live analysis. This live analysis can be technically challenging when a computer is password protected, preventing the use of software solutions.
A proficiency test has been created to determine which procedures and methods different laboratories use to acquire RAM, how these methods relate to each other and the quality of the results. The goal is to determine better, standardized procedures.
The test requires the examiner to examine a locked computer. The computer is located at a crime scene that needs to be released to the public. This physical situation is challenging as it tests preparedness, procedures and technical aspects. Based on this setup the laboratories are expected to perform three tasks: move the computer, create a RAM image and perform analysis on the RAM image to decrypt the disk content.
The test has been open to forensic laboratories that collaborate as part of ENFSI, the European Network of Forensic Science Institute. Six laboratories chose to participate.
Section Sample preparation describes the test setup that has been offered to the participants. As some participants have used similar methods, the methods that have been used will be described first. These methods will be linked to participating laboratories in Section Laboratory results. Section Methods for moving a computer while mains powered describes the power takeover procedures extensively in a tutorial style as it is usually not documented in forensic papers. It serves as documentation of what the laboratories considered “reliable principles and methods” (Federal rules of evidence). Some readers may want to skip this section.
Section Methods for RAM acquisition describes the steps the laboratories took during the RAM acquisition part of the test. The description includes the author's opinion on the risks and merits of the different methods. Section Methods for data analysis describes the analysis step of the forensic process, and problems encountered during the analysis of corrupted RAM images. Section Acquired RAM validation evaluates the binary RAM images that two laboratories produced, it describes the ordering problems, systematic errors and random errors. Section Laboratory results shortly describes the procedure each laboratory has followed and refers to the earlier described methods. Section Discussion and conclusions contains the conclusions.
