In this article, we present the Chiminey platform, which provides a reliable computing and data management service. Chiminey enables domain scientists, hereafter scientists, to compute on both cloud-based, big data, and high-performance computing (HPC) facilities, handle failure during the execution of applications, curate and visualise execution outputs, share such data with collaborators or the public, and to search for publicly available data without the need to have a technical understanding of cloud-computing, HPC, fault tolerance, or data management. Many scientific experiments have a twofold challenge: they are challenging as complicated domain-specific research tasks (i.e., a complicated analysis of the quantum physics approaches), and at the same time the corresponding computations and datasets are too large-scale to be executed on a local desktop machine, i.e., cloud-based and high-performance computing (HPC) solutions are required.
Any new technology usually means not only new opportunities but also new challenges, as a technology often manages some initial knowledge acquisition task of its users. Cloud computing [1] enables acquisition of very large computing and storage resources, which can be integrated with big data technologies for massive scale computation. Such acquisition can be done with relatively less specialised knowledge beyond that used for a single PC.
Nevertheless, failure while setting up a cloud-based execution environment or during the execution itself is arguably inevitable: some or all of the requested virtual machines (VMs) may not be successfully created/instantiated, or the communication with an existing VM may fail due to long-distance network failure – given cloud data centers are typically remote and communication crosses many network boundaries. Also, one has to realise that all tasks of such parallel computations are required to complete, therefore the failure of any one of them may corrupt the result in some way. Statistically this means that the reliability of the overall task completion is the product of that of the individual tasks – and with very many thousands or millions of compute tasks this may quickly become a vanishingly small number.
When using cloud computing platforms and big data technologies like Hadoop, scientists require operational skills and to some extent knowledge of aspects of fault tolerance. Scientists need to learn, for example, how to create and set up virtual machines (VMs), collect the results of experiments, and finally destroy VMs. Such challenges distract the user from focusing on their core goals. Thus, there is a need for a platform that encapsulates these problems and isolates them from the user. This would enable the user to focus on domain-specific problems, and to delegate the tool to deal with the detail that comes with accessing high-performance and cloud computing infrastructure, and the data management challenges posed. For these reasons, we propose a user-friendly open-source platform that would hide the above problems from the user by encapsulating them in the platform's functionality.
The proposed open-source platform has been applied across two research disciplines, physics (material characterisation) and structural biology (understanding materials at the atomic scale), to assess its usability and practicality. The domain experts noted the following advantages of the platform: time savings for computing and data management, user-friendly interface for the computation set up, and visualisation of the calculation results as 2D or 3D graphs.
Previous work: The first prototype of Chiminey was discussed in [2]. A formal model of a platform for scalable and fault-tolerant cloud computations as well as the implementation of this platform as the Chiminey platform was introduced in [3]. The model allows us to have a precise and concise specification of the platform on the logical level. We also presented the refined formal model of a cloud-based platform and the latest version of its open-source implementation [4], with the emphasis on usability and reliability aspects. The feasibility of the Chiminey platform is shown using case studies from the Theoretical Chemical and Quantum Physics group at RMIT university.
Outline: The rest of the article is organised as follows. Section 2 provides background information, links or contrasts our work with related work. Section 3 introduces one of the core artifacts of Chiminey, Smart Connectors, as well as the resources the platform provides. Section 4 presents the tutorial, targeting the different types of Chiminey users. Section 5 concludes the article and presents the core directions of our future work on Chiminey.
