Evidence-based curricular programs are the current gold standard in early childhood education, linked to improved student outcomes and holding potential to reduce the achievement gap (Pianta, Barnett, Burchinal, & Thornburg, 2009). In order to effect widespread change in student learning, high-quality curricula need to be implemented at scale with high fidelity of implementation (FOI; Coburn, 2003, Clements et al., 2015). Curricular FOI is the degree to which curricula are carried out as intended by developers (Berkel et al., 2011, Durlak and DuPre, 2008). One critical element of FOI we examine in this study is teachers' adherence to the core curricular components including materials, routines, and strategies. Unfortunately, FOI for early childhood curricula often varies by teacher, creating appreciably different experiences and ultimately, outcomes, for children (Lieber et al., 2009, Zaslow et al., 2010). Thus, supporting FOI is necessary to achieve the potential benefits of high-quality curricula.
Professional development (PD) formats that support curricular FOI, such as workshops and coaching (Clements and Sarama, 2008, Starkey et al., 2004), require substantial financial and human resources (Knight, 2014, TNTP, 2015). In sustainable curricular scale-up, districts, as opposed to curricula developers, must provide manageable PD supports for FOI that are less resource intensive (Coburn, 2003). FOI supports that allow for independent, teacher-driven PD engagement (Clements et al., 2015) could supplement more resource intensive and cost prohibitive PD and increase feasibility for school districts.
Internet-based resources allow for the provision of “just in time” supports (Romiszowski, 1997), or resources that can be used in the moment, while planning to teach a lesson (Dede et al., 2009, Gill, 2011). Teachers perceive pacing, flexibility, and convenient access as benefits of online PD (McNamara, 2010). However, provision of more resources does not necessarily mean more teacher use, especially in cases where teachers have agency over which resources they use and how often they use them (Kinzie et al., 2015, Powell et al., 2010). While researchers are beginning to examine characteristics of coaching that support FOI (Paxton, Wanless, & Rimm-Kauffman, 2013), little is known about the relationship between online supports (e.g., demonstration video exemplars) and teachers' FOI. Isolating and examining teachers' use of online PD resources, their relationship with teachers' FOI, and teachers' perceived usefulness of those online supports can inform the design of future online curricular support systems.
In this study, we examine the use of online curricular demonstration videos, video exemplars of high-quality and high-fidelity implementation of specific teaching practices (Pianta, Mashburn, Downer, Hamre, & Justice, 2008). We seek to explore the relationship between early childhood teachers' use of online demonstration videos and their FOI of the MyTeachingPartner-Math/Science (MTP-M/S) early childhood mathematics and science curricula. Observing other teachers' instruction through videos is a common technique for teacher training (Borko et al., 2008, Star and Strickland, 2008). However, in studies published to-date, researchers have not yet examined if viewing video exemplars is positively associated with teachers' own FOI.
In order to better understand teachers' use of online PD resources, we qualitatively examine teachers' perceptions of the usefulness of online demonstration videos in supporting their FOI. Using a sequential mixed methods explanatory design, we draw on the strengths of numeric data to establish a significant positive relationship between demonstration video viewing and FOI. Then, we draw on the strengths of narrative data, employing elements of grounded theory (Charmaz and Belgrave, 2012, Strauss and Corbin, 1998), to further understand why teachers choose to use the videos or not.
1.1. Defining and measuring fidelity of implementationBerkel et al.'s (2011) model of program implementation includes fidelity, quality of implementation, adaptation, and participant responsiveness. In this study, we focus on curricular fidelity of implementation (FOI), or the extent to which teachers adhere to the lesson design and carry out the actual components or steps in an activity as presented in the curriculum (e.g., Piasta, Justice, McGinty, Mashburn, & Slocum, 2015). For example, as illustrated in Fig. 1, each MTP-M/S activity includes an “Investigate” section comprised of a series of steps to guide students' inquiry (Kinzie et al., 2015). One indicator of adherence to an MTP-M/S activity is the completion of each investigation step. While we recognize that FOI can be considered more broadly as a multifaceted construct including but not limited to measures of dosage, quality, adaptation, and responsiveness (Berkel et al., 2011, Durlak and DuPre, 2008, O'Donnell, 2008), we use this narrower, adherence-focused definition of FOI based on instructional design of the demonstration videos to specifically show activities carried out as intended. Our confirmatory questions and hypotheses are based on our belief that the videos will have a primary influence on adherence to the curricular design.Download : Download high-res image (766KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. MTP-M/S activity plan. All activity plans were provided in print format and available on the website, organized by curricular sequence.FOI is of key importance in interpreting if outcomes are a true reflection of an intervention's effect. In others words, they can help, “distinguish between intervention failure and implementation failure” (Abry, Hulleman, & Rimm-Kaufman, 2015, p. 321). If an intervention is delivered with low fidelity, positive effects are not necessarily attributable to the intervention, and negative or null effects are not necessarily evidence of an unsuccessful intervention (Wang, Nojan, Strom, & Walberg, 1984; Durlak & DuPre, 2008). Investigations of preschool science (Gropen, Clark-Chiarelli, Ehrlich, & Thieu, 2011), literacy (Davidson, Fields, & Yang, 2009), and mathematics (Kinzie et al., 2015) curricula have found higher FOI to be positively associated with gains in students' skills. Findings such as these lend support for the importance of designing curricular support packages to specifically target teachers' FOI and examining FOI as a moderator of curricular effects.
1.2. Fidelity of implementation for sustainable curricular scale upSustainable curricular scale up – the degree to which curricula can be implemented over time in diverse contexts with continued fidelity to the curricular design (Coburn, 2003, Dede, 2006) – is of growing concern in the field of educational research (Century & Cassata, 2014). Ultimately, school districts need to sustain curricula with fewer financial and human resources than may have been available in the initial implementation (Fishman, Marx, Blumenfeld, & Soloway, 2004). Lack of resources might contribute to low levels of program sustenance, as in the case of First Step, a program supporting students' replacement of problem behaviors with positive behaviors both at school and home (Sumi et al., 2012). Despite positive academic and behavioral outcomes, only one of five sites maintained use of the program after a scale-up trial.Recent studies and discussions of curricular sustainability emphasize the continued importance of FOI (Clements et al., 2015, Fishman et al., 2011, Layzer, 2013) beyond initial establishment of positive curricular effects. Sustained FOI is moderated by teachers' initial degree of implementation fidelity (Clements et al., 2015, Lieber et al., 2010). Teachers showing high FOI at the start of a study are better able to maintain implementation fidelity over time (Clements et al., 2015, Wenz-Gross and Upshur, 2012) and are more likely to continue to use curricula beyond an implementation trial (Lieber et al., 2010). Effective, independently accessible, and less resource-intensive supports hold promise both for initially increasing and sustaining high curricular FOI, maximizing the impacts of evidence-based curricula on student outcomes by establishing and maintaining treatment strength.
1.3. Online support for teachers' fidelity of implementationCurriculum developers are shifting both formal, in-person PD formats (e.g., workshops, coaching), and independently accessible, teacher-selected PD resources (e.g., demonstration videos), online with promising results (Downer et al., 2009, Hamre et al., 2012, Powell et al., 2010). Online PD increases flexibility and decreases travel costs while maintaining or extending geographic reach (Dede et al., 2009). Although evidence suggests the viability of online curricular guidance as an alternative to in-person support in terms of the impact on student learning gains (e.g., Powell, Diamond, Burchinal et al., 2010), curricular implementation interventions finding consistently high FOI often provide costly formal PD formats such as workshop series and intensive instructional coaching (Clements and Sarama, 2008, Knight, 2014, Starkey et al., 2004, TNTP, 2015). Online curricular resources, Internet-based supports providing instructional guidance and models, are a scalable and affordable alternative to promote successful curricular implementation leading to positive gains in student outcomes (Downer et al., 2011, Hamre et al., 2010).The provision of online curricular resources also allows for increased teacher agency in self-selecting independently accessible supports, but there are mixed findings as to their relative value. Pianta et al. (2008) found teachers receiving both coaching and access to website resources that included video exemplars of high quality interactions had significantly greater improvement in classroom interactions than teachers with access to the website only, controlling for teacher and classroom characteristics. However, for those teachers with access to the website alone, higher usage rates, measured by page views, were associated with greater gains in classroom interaction quality. It seems there was value in the website resources independent of coaching, but they were most effective when used in a blended model. Contrary to Pianta et al.'s (2008) findings, Hamre et al. (2012) did not find significantly different gains in students' social competence skills between teachers who received coaching in addition to website resource access and those who receive website resources only. The authors did find a similarly positive relationship between time teachers spent on a website and students' social competence skills. While the additive value of coaching to website resources is unclear, the positive relationship between website usage rates and both teacher practices and student outcomes supports the value of online resources as a promising curricular support.In order to reap the identified benefits of online curricular resources, teachers must engage with them. However, teachers vary significantly in their use of provided resources. Downer, Kraft-Sayre, et al. (2009) investigated website usage patterns of pre-kindergarten (pre-k) teachers engaged in an intervention targeting teacher-child interactions and found that teachers, on average, accessed the PD website (lessons plans, lesson materials, and video exemplars) for approximately 4–5 h over the school year. But, the variance in teachers' minutes of website use per week was high (Year 1 M = 11.2 min, SD = 16.1; Year 2 M = 9.0, SD = 13.1), and teachers who received coaching in addition to online resources spent significantly more time using the website. There is similar range in use when teachers receive explicit direction toward resources (Hemmeter et al., 2011, Powell et al., 2010). Powell, Diamond, and Koehler (2010) found that teachers ranged from 0 to 74 visits to video exemplar pages and independently accessed only 20% of recommended video exemplars despite links embedded in the coach's written feedback.Range in teachers' use of online curricular supports may be due, in part, to demographic characteristics. In a study of pre-k teacher coaching and web support PD, Downer, Locasale-Crouch, Hamre, and Pianta (2009) identified that older teachers and those with higher self-efficacy spent more time on the website resource pages. Alternatively, teachers' with more pre-k experience spent less time on the website resource pages.By supplementing formal, externally driven PD experiences with resources intended for independent use, teachers have the opportunity for continuous learning focused on their individual needs (Jones & Dexter, 2014), an identified component of curricular sustainability (Clements et al., 2015). Additionally, the frequency of cost-intensive formal PD can be reduced to improve sustainable feasibility. However, if resources and attention are to be devoted to increasing teachers' positive perceptions and use of online resources for independent professional learning, their value in terms of associated positive changes in teacher practice needs to be closely examined.
1.4. Early childhood educators' need for fidelity of implementation supportResearch suggests that early childhood educators need support in effectively implementing evidence-based best practices. Research conducted in U.S. pre-k settings shows that although most programs report having a curriculum, as much as 44% of the classroom day is spent in non-instructional activities (Early et al., 2010, La Paro et al., 2009). Additionally, large scale studies suggest the quality of instructional support is low (Hamre, 2014). This may be due, in part, to variation in the efficacy of PD supports for teacher's curricular implementation (Lieber et al., 2009).Online demonstration videos can be an effective component of a PD system (Pianta et al., 2008). They allow for a convenient and accessible display of high-quality, authentic practice (Pianta et al., 2009). Teachers can access them anytime, providing professional support when teachers need it (Perry & Talley, 2001). Early childhood teachers take advantage of this logistical affordance, evidenced by the varied timing of their resource access across the day and their use of videos throughout an intervention period (Powell, Diamond, & Koehler, 2010). However, teachers do not consistently take advantage of provided resources at high levels (Downer et al., 2009, Powell and Diamond, 2013).Despite varied levels of use, early childhood teachers' perceptions of online supports are generally positive (Powell et al., 2010, Whitaker et al., 2007). Teachers in Head Start classrooms, a nationally-funded program to promote the school readiness of children from low-income families, engaged in Powell, Diamond, and Koehler's (2010) coaching for vocabulary and phonemic awareness instruction consistently rated video exemplars high in terms of video usefulness. Additionally, early childhood teachers with access to website resources that included demonstration videos and teaching techniques perceived greater utility of an intervention website than teachers only receiving access to digital versions of curricular plans (Whitaker et al., 2007). As the ultimate goal of curricular support is to improve student outcomes through changes in teachers' classroom practices, a more nuanced understanding of why teachers' feel curricular demonstration videos are or are not useful could inform the design of future video resources to maximize teacher use.
1.5. MyTeachingPartner–Math/ScienceMathematics and science receive little instructional time in U.S. pre-k classrooms (Early et al., 2010, La Paro et al., 2009) and are areas in which teachers receive less training and PD support (Parks & Wager, 2015). However, early mathematics and science skills are foundational not only for students' future mathematics and science learning but also their learning in other domains (Grissmer, Grimm, Aiyer, Murrah, & Steele, 2010). We designed the MTP-M/S curricula and professional support system to improve children's early mathematics and science skills by increasing the quality of interactions and instruction that support children's learning in these areas (Kinzie et al., 2014, Whittaker et al., 2016).The MTP-M/S curricula include 132 activities implemented across a school year (Kinzie et al., 2015). We designed the activities to foster student inquiry and provide contextualized learning of mathematics and science concepts, drawing connections between the students' world and targeted concepts. The curricula include “within activity” supports such as learning and development theory-based best practice teaching tips for each activity and adaptations for differentiated learning. (See Kinzie et al, 2015. for a complete description of the curricula development process and alignment with preschool mathematics and science research-based best practice.) Within-activity supports are accompanied by a blended formal, in-person and independent, asynchronous PD support system featuring video demonstrations.1.5.1. MTP-M/S teacher support systemThe MTP-M/S teacher support system consists of five in-person PD workshops across the school year and access to a dedicated website. We designed the workshops to increase teachers' content knowledge about children's mathematics and science learning and help teachers to plan for and reflect on activity implementation. The support system aligns with research-based best practice PD recommendations (Desimone & Garet, 2015) suggesting support should be sustained throughout the year (workshop spread and ongoing Internet resource access), focused on content (children's mathematics and science learning), and include active learning opportunities (teacher reflection). Further, the focus on mathematics and science is coherent with a national U.S. effort to improve students' mathematics and science skills (National Science and Technology Council Committee on STEM Education, 2013).The MTP-M/S website includes: (1) video demonstrations of all curricular activities, (2) digital versions of activity plans, and (3) year-long activity trajectory displays by subject, identifying the domain of each mathematics and science activity and illustrating the flow of activities by domain across the year. When a teacher navigated to an activity, he or she first landed on the associated demonstration video page, as shown in Fig. 2. A teaching tip, identical to one on the activity plan, accompanied the demonstration video. The complete instructions for facilitating the activity were available on a second tab (“Activity Details”).Download : Download high-res image (426KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. MTP-M/S Demonstration video webpage for Worms II activity. Text overlay on the video highlights the “Investigate” step.Demonstration videos are the only resource unique to the website, as teachers also received activity plans and trajectories in print format. Demonstration videos range in length from 1 min, 29 s to 6 min, 7 s (M = 3 min, 55 s) and feature high fidelity implementations of all activity components that incorporate high-quality teacher-child interactions. We intended MTP-M/S activities to be 10–20 min long, so the demonstration videos show or describe key moments in the activity rather than a complete, unedited implementation. As teachers and students engage in each of the key phases of the activity (Engage, Investigate, and Discuss), text overlay identifies the phase and specific step in the activity plan, as shown in Fig. 1 with “Investigate: check the Eco bottles.” We used video from the pilot implementation of MTP-M/S to create the demonstration videos, showing actual teachers implementing the curricula.Desimone and Garet (2015) identify the use of catalogued video resources used in real-time as teachers plan their lessons as “an area ripe for further research” (2015, p. 258). In this study, we are specifically interested in the time teachers spent viewing the online demonstration videos and if this is related to their FOI. Further, we want to understand teachers' perceptions of the demonstration videos in terms of their usefulness for curricular implementation guidance.
