The continuous development of quality control systems is driven by both reasons, economic and environmental, particularly in production systems with a large number of different processing operations. The graphic industry is one of those production systems with numerous different processing steps and operations. The production process in the graphic industry can be divided into three phases: prepress, press (printing) and post-press (print finishing) [1]. Computer or machine vision-based techniques are often used in modern production systems as a substitute for visual assessments carried out by human observers. They are already present in the graphic industry, mostly in the field of different printing techniques, i.e. web or sheet-fed offset, flexo-gravure, screen or electrophotography printing [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7]. Some print finishing operations have also computer-vision elements integrated into their quality control (i.e. cutting or collating) or process monitoring system (i.e. handling or conveying) but, the majority of the manufacturing operations is still assessed mainly manually [1]. The folding process, as a basic print finishing technique included in the production process of most graphic products, is one of the manually monitored operations. A high-quality fold has to be at the right position and free of surface damages or material fractures [8]. Its quality control on the spot is usually done by the machine operator, mostly visually. The derived quality measures are highly dependent on the operators’ experience, fatigue and other subjective influences, but with an objective folding quality estimation method, based on computer-vision and implemented in the production process, the aforementioned problems could be overcome [9].
1.1. Folding a coated paperCoated papers are widely used printing substrates as raw materials in the graphic industry. Due to the coating layer, they can provide excellent printing quality, regardless of the applied printing technique. Along with their advantages of high reproduction quality, utilization of different surface treatments such as varnishing or foil laminating, coated papers and paperboards have some deficiencies as well, mostly in the last stage of graphic production - print finishing. One of the most frequently present deficiencies is surface damaging during the folding process [10].Based on the most simplified model of folded paper (Fig. 1), the largest deformation on the outer side (εmax) is defined via the paper’s thickness (s) and radius of folding curvature (ρ) [10], [11]. In the case of a completely folded paper (with an inner angle of 0°), the distance between the outer surface of folded material (a) becomes twice the paper thickness (2 ∗ s), and the radius of folding curvature (ρ) would be half the paper thickness (s/2). The largest deformation (εmax) can be expressed and simplified as in Eq. (1) [10]:(1)εmax=s/2ρ=1Download : Download high-res image (43KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The most simplified model of folded paper [10].Eq. (1) implies that the maximum tensile stresses on the outer side of the folding line will indicate 100% of elongation of material fibers, while by compression stresses, fibers on the inner side of the folding line will become 100% shorter [10]. Materials with anisotropic and laminated structure often cannot withstand that amount of load. The surface layers of these materials will endure various surface defects on both sides of the folding line. In the case of coated papers, these surface defects occur in different forms of coating and base paper cracks or destructions: the coating layers are usually cracked up (Fig. 2a) due to the high-localized tensile and compression stresses acting on the inner and outer side of the folding line, while the fibrous structure of the base paper is weakened. The crack lines on the folded edge decrease the visual appearance of the graphic product, but by the extremely heavy destruction of the base paper and coating layers (Fig. 2b), the substrate could lose on the overall material strength and the utilization of the finished product is then directly jeopardized. By increasing the basis weight of the material to be folded, these problems become more emphasized [12], [13].Download : Download high-res image (279KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Typical example of fold-cracks over the coating layer (a) and base paper weakening during the folding process [13].
1.2. Influencing factors and applied testing methods of fold-crack resistanceMany studies have been published about the factors that influence the fold-crack resistance and the behavior of coated paper during the folding process. They can be classified into two major groups: factors of the paper production and factors of the paper processing [13].The first group includes, but is not limited to the fiber composition, thickness and basis weight of the base paper, type of coating pigment and binder and also their proportion in the coating composition, bond between the base paper and coating layers, number and mechanical properties of the coating layers, etc. [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. These factors are often investigated by different instrumental analysis of mechanical properties (tensile strength, bending stiffness, smoothness, fold endurance, etc.) accordingly with corresponding standards. Based on these methods profound analysis could be done with the exact comparison of the quality distinction among different coated papers with objective and reproducible results. However, in industrial applications for real-time production quality control, these objective methods are not suitable, mostly because they are destructive, time-consuming and demanding regarding implementation.The second group consists of factors of paper processing, i.e. graphic production and print finishing. These are the grain direction, thickness and basis weight of the folded paper, relative humidity, folding machine set-up, presence of multi-color printing over the folded area and different preparation techniques, etc. [10], [12], [13], [22], [23], [24], [25]. Among such technical problems (i.e. register alignment, double sheets feeding, paper wrinkling), the surface cracking along the folding line is necessary to be detected and prevented or at least minimized by permanent process monitoring and modifying the folding machine set-up. This type of quality control is usually done by the machine operator, inspecting the folded sheets visually, or sometimes mechanically when the operator applies tension with hands on both sides of the opened up and placed flat folded sheet to assess the strength of the fold [14]. Visual assessment of the folded paper is a fast and non-destructive technique, but because of its subjective nature, the obtained results are not always repeatable, and they heavily depend on the controller’s experience. Due to these drawbacks, the classical visual analysis is also not suitable for the precise definition of manufacturing and processing parameters of coated papers.Nowadays, different computer-aided visual assessments are applied in numerous studies for fold-crack resistance evaluation of coated papers. To quantitatively characterize the amount of surface damage, simple digital image analyses were used based on the number of white pixels on the digitized images of folded lines [9], [11], [14], [19], [21], [26], [27], [28]. These techniques share the basic concept of damage registration, digitization and calculation (Fig. 3). For the better contrast between the damaged and undamaged areas, the samples were printed with some darker color, then folded with or without creasing. Later on, the folded samples were digitized via scanner or digital camera and parsed by digital image analysis techniques and the total amount of surface damages was calculated as one parameter. This type of visual assessment merges the objectivity of quantitative measures and the simplicity of non-destructive, quick visual evaluation.Download : Download high-res image (122KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. The basic concept of computer-aided fold-crack evaluation of coated paper.The positive features of these methods are obvious, but significant deficiencies are also noticed. Alongside the variations in some aspects of sample preparation (sample number and size, applied printing color and technique, folding process) and digitization techniques (equipment, lighting, color mode, resolution, magnification, etc.), the evaluation processes themselves were also different in a certain way (image pre-processing, mathematical basis for crack amount calculating, value representing, etc.), therefore the obtained results of these research are not comparable. Additionally, lack of detailed description of image processing and analysis was also detected. Different applications of these algorithms for image quality improvements (i.e. contrast enhancement, histogram equalization, filtering) and image processing (i.e. edge detection, segmentation) could have a significant impact on the results and make them even more distinct. Although there are some shortcomings of the current non-uniform utilization, with adequate optimization of hardware and software needs, it has a promising potential for implementation in a real-time in-line inspection system. In order to analyze the benefits and deficiency of different computer-aided fold-crack evaluation approaches, to find optimal sample preparation and digitization techniques, detailed research was conducted with the main aim to develop and propose a model for computer vision-based assessment method for the folding quality evaluation of coated papers.
