Science is now an integral part of modern life. Scientists receiving public funding are obliged to transmit their research to the public. Poliakoff and Webb [1] discussed many factors that influence the scientists’ participations in public engagement activities with science and technology. As science is progressively becoming more complicated and specific, it is not easy to find appropriate ways to improve people’s knowledge of science and technology; and it is challenging to enhance people’s appreciation for the contributions of scientists and engineers to society. The clear and concise way for scientists to present a scientific contribution is to present the contribution itself, which requires a considerable scientific background for the audience, but that is very often not the case for non-domain members. We see too often that tensions exist at the intersection of people’s interest and certain scientific findings. In this paper, we introduce a serious game that gamifies the scientific events of Apollo moon missions executed in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The applied gamification enables a bidirectional communication [2] to engage members of the public, especially for youth and young adults, and promotes their interest in learning in the fields of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM).
Video games have expanded beyond being simply an entertainment medium, to a medium that many researchers and educators believe can help people engage with, learn, and retain content that they otherwise might struggle with. It is not surprising that video games have been used to supplement both in-classroom and informal education [3], [4], [5]. Serious video games allow people to devour information in interactive and entertaining ways, rather than static or one-sided. Deterding et al. [6], [7] defined the term Gamification which is “the use of game design elements in non-game contexts.” Gamified applications present emerging phenomena and make the shift from understanding to engagement to learning promotion. Video games serve as a bridge for the communication between scientists and the public. According to the article by Murphy [8], games can motivate, educate, interact with people, and visualize complex scientific facts; as such, games have strong potential for learning engagement.
Space exploration carried out by astronauts has inspired younger generations to study science and engineering. Since the 1950s, NASA has conducted efforts to several space projects such as the Apollo moon missions, the skylab space station, and the space shuttle. Everyone loves to know about the rockets and space travel. According to a report from the National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics [9], Markovich [10] stated that “the percentage of bachelor’s-degree graduates in science and engineering fields peaked in the late 1960s, around the time of the moon landing, but has declined slowly since”. To rekindle the youth interest in STEM and prepare them for the growth of STEM occupations, serious games have been made by science museums and space centers [11], [12] which allow people to understand space and aerospace missions through play. While those serious games consider a wide range of audience, they sacrifice a significant amount of realistic interactions and lack the strength to present rich contents of scientific achievements.
In this paper, we present the design, development, and evaluation of an Apollo lunar exploration game, which is a single-player serious game that imitates the astronauts’ science-related experiment and exploratory activities on the Moon. Different from the lunar rover simulators [13], [14], our game challenges players to accomplish a task under victory or loss conditions. As part of an ongoing NASA-inspired, game-based educational project, we have focused on the gamification of a part of the Apollo 16 mission. The gamification methodology and underlying implementation described in this paper are considered as a fundamental platform for the ongoing gamification of Apollo mission series. This game targets primarily on youth and young adults. The game design and development require interdisciplinary knowledge and the collaboration among designers, 3D artists, programmers, mechanical engineers, and educators. Besides the contributions in gamification and interdisciplinary collaboration, we also solve the technical challenges of terrain generation and real-time rendering, where big data from Geographic Information System (GIS) is adopted. The game uses the accurate lunar terrain data and detailed 3D spacecraft models to represent historical facts correctly. Besides allowing the traverse of the lunar surface regions discovered in the past, the game also allows players to explore undocumented regions. The evaluation includes an empirical assessment of the game usability and a study of its implication for educational values.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work in serious games. Section 3 provides the details of gamification and game design. Section 4 presents solutions to the challenges of lunar terrain generation and real-time rendering. Section 5 describes the challenges of 3D rover modeling. Section 6 presents the evaluation of usability study and analysis of learning engagement. Section 7 concludes our work and proposes future work.
