Social sensing has emerged as a new networked sensing paradigm that uses humans as sensors to report the states of the physical world [1], [2], [3]. Examples of social sensing applications include tracking the real-time traffic condition using mobile crowdsensing [4], obtaining the real-time disaster and emergency awareness using online social media [5], and monitoring the urban air quality using reports from citizens [6]. Compared to traditional sensing paradigms that use physical sensors, social sensing has been shown to be more pervasive, scalable and economic in its applications [7]. In this paper, we focus on a  migratable traffic risk estimation problem in intelligent transportation systems using social sensing. Our goal is to accurately estimate the traffic accident rate of locations in a target area where the ground truth traffic accident reports are  not available by leveraging an estimation model from a  source area where such data is available.
Previous efforts have been made towards addressing the traffic risk estimation problem in data mining, networked sensing, and intelligent transportation systems [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. Those solutions primarily rely on historic ground truth labels of traffic accidents in the studied area to build reliable estimation models [13]. However, such ground truth data is not always available in many places due to various resource constraints and privacy/legal concerns [14], [15]. For example, less than 1% of cities in United States have open web portals to access their traffic accident data.1  The traffic monitoring devices are prohibited by law in 10 states in United States.2  On the other hand, the rich traffic information collected by some widely deployed mobile crowdsensing applications (e.g., Waze) is privately owned by the companies and not available to the public access [16]. The lack of publicly available ground truth data on traffic accidents presents a fundamental challenge to the traffic risk estimation problem.
To address the above challenge, this paper develops a social sensing based deep transfer learning solution to estimate the traffic risk of locations in an area where the ground truth traffic accident data is not available. For example, consider the traffic risk estimation problem in two cities near our campus: South Bend and Mishawaka. The two cities are both located in the northern Indiana region with similar population densities (i.e., 2457/sq mi vs. 2765/sq mi) and weather conditions (i.e., long snow season). However, the city of South Bend has an open data portal for accessing traffic accident data of the city3  motivated by its smart city initiative but Mishawaka does not. In this example, our goal is to estimate the traffic risk of locations in Mishawaka (target area) by “migrating” the traffic risk estimation model learned in South Bend (source area). Such a migratable traffic estimation problem is not trivial to solve due to several challenges elaborated below.
Discrepancy Between Source and Target Areas. A simple solution to address the migratable traffic risk estimation problem is to directly apply the estimation model learned from the source area to estimate the traffic risks in the target area. However, a major issue of this solution is that the target and source areas may be different in many aspects (e.g., layouts, road conditions, traffic volumes, and local regulations) that would prevent a direct application of a model learned from the source area to the target area [17]. Such discrepancy between the source and target areas can potentially lead to the undesirable overfitting problems in the estimations (i.e., the model learned from the source area might be an overfitted model to estimate traffic risk in the target area) [18]. Therefore, the migrated estimation model needs to explicitly accommodate the discrepancy between different areas.
Complex and Latent Risk Features. The second challenge refers to the fact that it is extremely difficult (if possible) to identify all relevant features in the migratable traffic risk estimation problem due to the arbitrarily large feature space and the latent nature of certain features (e.g., cognitive conditions of drivers, the driving habits of an area) [9]. Furthermore, it is also challenging to decide the importance (e.g., weights) of the identified features in an estimation model when the training data set is insufficient or not available at all (e.g., target areas in our problem) [19]. Therefore, it is a not trivial task to automatically identify a critical set of complex and latent traffic risk features and effectively encode them into the migratable estimation model.
To address the above challenges, we develop DeepRisk, a social sensing based migratable traffic risk estimation scheme using deep transfer learning techniques. To address the challenge of discrepancy between source and target areas, we develop a principled deep transfer learning framework to effectively migrate the risk estimation model from the source area to the target area through a novel transformation neural network design. To address the complex and latent risk feature challenge, DeepRisk judiciously learns the traffic risk related features through a novel adversarial learning algorithm and explicitly encodes learned features into deep transfer learning network for the model migration. To the best of our knowledge, the DeepRisk is the first deep transfer learning based approach to address the migratable traffic risk estimation problem in intelligent transportation systems. We evaluate DeepRisk on a real-world dataset from New York City. The results show that our scheme significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines in terms of accurately estimating the traffic risk of locations in a city.
We choose the deep transfer learning framework to address the migratable traffic risk estimation problem in intelligent transportation systems for two main reasons. First, the source and target areas often have very different area-specific traffic risks (e.g., road conditions, traffic volumes, and speed limits), which could lead to a significant accuracy drop when a traffic risk estimation model is directly applied across areas [20]. The transfer learning solution is a natural solution for such application scenarios because it is capable of transferring the traffic risk estimation model learned from the source area to the target area by accommodating the discrepancy between the two areas using the cycle-consistent network design. Second, our deep neural network solution provides a capable data-driven solution that effectively identifies a critical set of complex and latent traffic risk features for accurate traffic estimation and effectively encodes the identified risk features using multi-layer neural representation. Our deep learning solution is in sharp contrast to the conventional estimation techniques (e.g., regression and supervised learning) which often assume well-defined traffic risk features in their models. However, such a well-defined risk feature set is not available in our problem setting due to the arbitrary large latent feature space of traffic risks.
A preliminary version of this work was published in the [21]. This paper is a significant extension of the previous work in the following aspects. First, we compare our DeepRisk scheme with a new set of recent traffic risk estimation baselines and demonstrate the performance gains achieved by the DeepRisk scheme compared to the state-of-the-art solutions (Section 5). Second, we extend the evaluation in the conference paper by explicitly studying the performance of all compared schemes on traffic risk estimation across a different number of sensing cycles. The new results demonstrate the robustness of our scheme with various time windows (Section 5). Third, we extend the related work by adding a new discussion on the recent progress and challenges in urban sensing, which is closely related to the topic of this paper (Section 2). Fourth, we add a detailed justification on why deep and transfer learning techniques are adopted to address the migratable traffic risk estimation problem in the solution section (Section 4). Finally, we add a new discussion section to discuss the limitations and future work of our DeepRisk framework (Section 7).
