Since Alan Turing proposed the famous question “Can machines think?” in 1950, the emergence of intelligent machines has been witnessed in the past several decades. In the same year, Norbert Wiener envisioned the popularity of interactions between humans and machines and machines and machines (Wiener, 1988). While the idea of machine-machine communication has been testified with 61.5% of traffic on the web being non-human (Kelion, 2013), human-machine communication has yet to become prevalent.
Gunkel (2012) proposed that a paradigm shift from computer-mediated communication (CMC) to human-machine communication (HMC) is needed to address the issues associated with communicating with intelligent machines, autonomous decision making systems, and smart devices. Unlike previous generations of machines with few signs of intelligence, those intelligent machines now not only function as a channel of communication process, but also play an active role in participating in communicative interactions.
One of the most representative forms of those intelligent machines is robots. Robots have been adopted in restaurants, shopping malls, and hospitals. For instance, telepresence robot SAM can work as a nurse assistant to check on senior patients' physical status (Ackerman, 2016). Anderson (2016) observed that the Kirobi Mini robot from Japan could promote people's emotional responses to babies. In addition to the physically embodied robots, online chatbots have also been widely used. Franceschi-Bicchierai (2016) found that a Twitter chatbot in Argentina could trick people into believing its human identity. Today as people have a growing chance of interacting with these digital interlocutors, studying how people initiate and engage in a conversation with machines would lead us to understand our reactions and attitudes towards machines.
Comparing the initial human-machine communication and human-human communication would bring benefits to our interpretation of any potential boundary between humans and machines. Although previous research on media equation has suggested that humans treat media as social actors (Nass and Moon, 2000, Reeves and Nass, 1996), whether media users apply the same level of social responses to media as to humans remains to be explored. The current study on the comparisons between human-human communication and human-machine communication would thus contribute to the theoretical framework of media equation.
In addition, engineers and designers could customize their products based on users' personalities in human-machine communication. For example, research has suggested that agreeableness could help reduce interpersonal distance between humans and robots (Takayama & Pantofaru, 2009). In order to improve the user experience of human-machine communication, designers could embed different types of personalities in machines or applications based on users’ needs and social responses. Thus, examining the personalities people reveal in human-machine communication would have both theoretical and practical implications.
Overall, this study aims to investigate a specific question: During human users’ initial interactions with artificial intelligence (AI), would they reveal their personality traits and communicative attributes differently from human-human interactions? Based on a review of two theoretical frameworks, hypotheses are proposed and tested by an exploratory study.
