The correlation between human diseases and chromosome abnormalities has been recognized since 1956, when Tjio and Levan [1] discovered that the number of human chromosomes was 46. Thus, chromosome analysis and karyotyping (a standard representation of the 23 pairs of chromosomes) are becoming key procedures for efficient genetic diseases diagnosis. However, traditional chromosome karyotyping processes are performed manually in most cytogenetic laboratories. In fact, the cytogeneticist must cut the individual chromosomes in the metaphase images (where the chromosomes appear as a succession of dark and light bands) and visually determine their centromere location in order to evaluate the arm length of each chromosome. The chromosomes of each class are paired and pasted together in decreasing order of size in the karyotype. The preliminary ordering is by length and centromere position for numerical abnormalities detection. Furthermore, additional time and effort are needed for structural abnormalities detection; in this case the cytogeneticist should revise the resulting karyotype according to the banding patterns (typically 400–800 visible bands).
The steps of centromere location, chromosome isolation, chromosome arm length evaluation, chromosome counting, banding observation, and pairing are performed manually. All these procedures require meticulous attention to details, which makes the process of manual karyotype repetitive and time-consuming. Computer-aided systems for chromosome classification are therefore highly needed to automate the chromosome analysis and help cytogeneticists to efficiently perform this time-consuming task.
Various computer-aided systems [2], [3], [4], [5], [6] have been developed to automate the chromosome classification procedure and karyotype establishment routine as well as the chromosomes abnormalities detection. Artificial neural networks have been widely adopted for chromosome classification, due to their processing capacity inherent to their parallel architectures. However, most of the works done in this area consist of software implementations running on a conventional computer that transforms the parallelism features of the ANNs to serial operations, thus reducing their computing power. On the other hand, commercially available automated systems for karyotyping are semi-automatic and still expensive [5], [7].
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are no hardware implementations for chromosome classification systems in the available literature; existing Automatic Karyotyping Systems (AKS) are software-based. Since a hardware implementation of such system can recreate the parallelism inherent to neural networks, we designed a system on chip for human chromosome classification, while reducing power consumption, circuit size, and the design cost.
Fully parallel modules can be achieved by Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) and Very-Large-Scale Integration (VLSI) circuits but it is expensive and time consuming to design such chips. We therefore targeted a Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) platform to validate the functionality of the proposed architecture. This choice is justified by its processing capabilities and relatively reduced development cycle and cost. Also, the proposed architectural model is technology-independent and can be implemented on another technology. FPGA-based implementation of ANN, mainly for classification applications, allows parallelism and easy storage of input data and the synaptic weights. The motivations behind an FPGA-based SoC for automatic chromosome classification are mainly:

1.Parallelism: The software-based implementation of these systems running on a conventional computer transforms the parallelism features of the ANN into serial operations. Because the FPGA combines parallel computing, function integration of the system and low power dissipation, the hardware implementation of such system can achieve the parallelism required by ANN and significantly increase its speed.2.Reduced processing time: One major improvement with the hardware implementation of such chromosomes classifier is in the training processing time, i.e., in the enhancement of the convergence time, which is an important issue. The network convergence time of software-based ANN classifiers is in the range of 20 s–50 s, whereas the convergence time of the proposed hardware ANN classifier is about 409 µs.3.Reduced power consumption: FPGA-based SoC for human chromosome classification is indeed less power consuming than a software-based one.4.Miniaturization: The SoC based on FPGA implementation allows a miniaturization of the chromosomes classifier thus, considerably reducing the space used by conventional computers or any related equipment.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we present a state-of-art-of ANN-based chromosome classification systems and feature extraction techniques. The Kohonen self-organizing map neural network is described in Section 3. An insight into the adopted methodology for the SoC-AKS elaboration is given in Section 4. Section 5 describes the proposed hardware architecture, mainly the Kohonen ANN-based classifier. The system prototyping results are exposed in Section 6. Finally, discussions and conclusions are given in Section 7 and Section 8, respectively.
