The exponential growth of new technologies (also called modern technologies) is changing the pace of modification in our world and inevitably makes society and people react. When new technologies emerge and start to spread, they bring new opportunities and a comfortable vision of the future, reasons by which are welcomed as visionary and challenging. However, for some people technology is seen as a threat to our established set of norms and patterns of behaviours, which make us adaptive in our living setting, and therefore brings negative emotional reactions, anxiety and fears. Consequently, new technologies generate the same level of enthusiasm and comfort, as well as fear and discomfort. This ambivalence is expressed by technophobia (rejection and/or avoidance of technology) and technophilia (attraction and enthusiastic adoption of technology). Despite the fact that technophobia and technophilia are increasing phenomena in today's society, they have been hardly studied so far due to the fact that science is increasingly focusing on developing new technologies, rather than evaluating the users' attitudes, emotions and behaviours toward them. Subsequently, specific assessment tools of technophobia and technophilia are scarce. The present paper aims to develop and validate a questionnaire in order to measure both constructs (technophobia and technophilia) in a sample composed of 534 participants from two different countries (Poland and Estonia).
1.1. TechnophobiaAlthough technophobia is, of course, closely related to computer anxiety, the two concepts are distinct. Whereas computer anxiety is defined as an unpleasant emotional state or condition when interacting with computers and the Internet [1], [2], technophobia is a broader concept including aversive behavioral, affective, and attitudinal responses to modern technologies and/or complex technical devices [3], [4], [5].Technophobia is a significant problem in today's society, since many people carry negative feelings toward new technology and avoid using it despite the big infusion of technological advances in every aspect of life [6]. Many users remain uncomfortable using new technologies, and instead use traditional methods to accomplish tasks [2] or limit the use of high performance devices to very basic functions, using only 10 to 25% of their capabilities [7]. With the increasing penetration of new technology in areas such as education, business, and the home, the problem of technophobia has become crucial [8], since its consequences may imply ineffectiveness or lower performance at work, increased absenteeism, increased security threats and vulnerabilities, etc. According to the Chapman University survey on American fears 2015, Bader and colleagues [9] found that technology was the second most rated source of fear in US, right behind natural disasters. These results suggested that people tend to express the highest level of fear for those things they're dependent on but that they do not have any control over, and that's almost a perfect definition of new technology.Despite the relevance of technophobia in today's society, research is more focused on developing new technological advances rather than evaluating their consequences. Indeed, very few assessment tools of technophobia have been developed so far. Some scales have been created to measure technophobia as a general attitude toward technology such as the Computer Attitude Scale (CAS) [10]. Others were designed in order to measure the multi-faceted nature of technophobia. A prime example of it is the well-known Technophobia Measurement Instruments (TMI) [11], which is based on their definition of the concept [12], and it measures three separate but rather overlapping dimensions: anxiety, negative cognitions, and negative attitudes [13], [14], [11], [15], [16]. Accordingly, these authors developed three separate scales designed to measure each of these dimensions: the Computer Anxiety Rating Scale (CARS), Computer Thoughts Survey (CTS) and the General Attitudes Toward Computers Scale (GATCS). Whereas this measure has been widely accepted, it is mainly focused on computerphobia (specific phobia expressed as an irrational fear or aversion to computers) rather than technophobia per se (including not only computers but modern technologies and/or complex technical devices). Furthermore, the third dimension (GATCS) has been revealed to be consistently unreliable in different studies [17], [18].In this study we propose a new technophobia measuring instrument, which is based on the etymology of technophobia as well as in previous definitions [12], [5]. Therefore, technophobia is understood here as fear, anxiety and discomfort toward new technologies (including a wide range of new devices, not only computers). Instead of conceiving technophobia as multi-dimensional, we initially proposed a pool of items covering the entire aforementioned definition. For that reason, a single factor structure was expected.
1.2. Technophilia1.2.1. EnthusiasmTechnophilia (from Greek τέχνη - technē, “art, skill, craft” and φίλος - philos, “beloved, dear, friend”) has been traditionally defined as a strong attraction and enthusiasm for technology, especially new technologies such as personal computers, the Internet, smartphones, and/or other devices [5]. However, we have reasons to think that technophilia is not a mere desire or positive attitude to use technology (enthusiasm), but also includes behaviours and emotions (i.e. dependency and technoreputation). We explain this point further in the following paragraphs.1.2.2. DependencySociety has rapidly generated a huge dependency on technology, and it has become a means to do almost everything (i.e. communicate with others, express oneself, etc.). This dependency can be explained from Schein's explanation on how individuals acquire underlying assumptions driving their behaviours [19]. Schein states that when a group of individuals (or society) takes a solution to proceed or solve a problem, and that solution is useful repeatedly over time, it is gradually established and eventually understood as a reality. Therefore, individuals conceive reality on those terms and could not imagine thinking or behaving differently (i.e. sending a hand-written letter to a friend who lives in another city, instead of sending her an email, private Facebook message, or Whatsapp). As a result, individuals develop dependence on technology, causing anxiety when it is [momentarily] not available (i.e. there is no connection to Internet). In its highest degree, dependency could bring addiction and/or obsession with all their associated problems. Thus, dependency is another category within technophilia, defined as the repetitive use of technology generated by a dominant need of experiencing its effects.1.2.3. TechnoreputationLast but not least, technophilia includes a need to update, also called technoreputation. Since technophiles see technologies as natural societal developments, improvements to daily life, or as forces that will transform reality for the better, they combine their enthusiasm and dependence with a fear of falling behind and losing out on the opportunity to join the technological advance. Additionally, to be technologically updated (getting new devices or apps, and their updates) shows willingness for youthful experimentation, a future orientation, flexibility, and openness to change [20]. High levels of technoreputation can lead an individual to spend a lot of money on electronic devices that he/she does not need, just for the pleasure of having the latest products on the market.To sum up, we consider technophilia as a broader concept which does not only include positive attitudes toward technology (enthusiasm and desire), but also repetitive behaviours (dependency), and emotions such as fear of falling behind and joy of having the latest products/versions (technoreputation). For these reasons, a three-factor structure was proposed for technophilia.
