Control of food doneness demands the development of new protocols suitable for the growing food-cooking industry, e.g., represented by vending machines that produce freshly-cooked food; and for air cleaning systems powered by the Internet of Things (IoT) (Potyrailo, 2016). Moreover, in industrial kitchens, cooking in huge quantities needs an automated determination of food state to be integrated into risk or quality management. While the evaluation of food readiness is usually made by assessment of color, texture, and chemical composition changes through aroma and color perceived by the human nose and eye (Ötles, 2016), it is rather subject to the psychological and physical condition of the human.
The complexity of the aroma can be primarily evaluated using analytical techniques such as gas chromatography or mass spectrometry which are, however, rather expensive, complex, time-consuming, and require trained personnel to operate. A much simpler technique is based on gas-analytical systems made of discrete sensors that are collected in arrays for the discrimination of odors or smell patterns mimicking mammalian olfactory systems (Persaud & Dodd, 1982). Such arrays, often called electronic noses or e-noses, have been already demonstrated as a useful tool for quality control in industries concerned with odors. Recently, a number of studies have been conducted using e-nose to analyze food quality, i.e. of wine grapes (Lerma et al., 2011), coffee beans (Dong et al., 2019), pork (Huang et al., 2014), to discriminate different categories of cheeses (Schroeder et al., 2019), and to monitor fruit spoilage and maturity, for example, of apple (Li, Heinemann, & Sherry, 2007) and banana (Chen et al., 2018). E-nose was applied to monitor food production (Ponzoni et al., 2008), i.e. the key aromas of the bread baking process using an array of four metal-oxide-based sensors. Hirano et al. studied the use of e-nose to detect the cooking state of microwave popcorn and waffles (Hirano et al., 2013). However, the e-nose can only acquire the volatile compounds and ignores other attributes of food like color or appearance in general. Though the food appearance is a complex and multi-parameter value, it can be monitored with advances in computer vision. These systems are rather intensively studied for integration in the technology of food processing, quality evaluation and control mainly combined with machine learning techniques (Du and Sun, 2006, Gunasekaran, 1996, Jackman and Sun, 2013). Such a high interest is because of the advantages of being fast, consistent, and objective (Brosnan & Sun, 2004), allowing many different applications like the assessment of freshness, texture, aging, or humidity of the meat surface (Taheri-Garavand et al., 2019). Although many studies are devoted to food quality, there are only a few reports on the issue of cooking and food preparation. Computer vision has been used for biscuit baking (Nashat and Abdullah, 2010, Yeh et al., 1995), beef doneness determination (Unklesbay et al., 1988), cheese melting (Wang & Sun, 2002), and for fried products (Leiva-Valenzuela et al., 2018). This method is proven objective when compared with sensorial evaluation (Greiff et al., 2015) because it relies on analytical methods of assessment of chemical processes occurring in organic tissues under heat (Farroni and del Pilar Buera, 2012, Gökmen et al., 2007).
The pattern recognition associated with both computer vision and e-nose employs various methods, statistical ones like linear discriminant analysis, and biologically motivated non-parametric methodologies, e.g. artificial neural networks (Hines et al., 2002, Jordan and Mitchell, 2015, Martinez and Kak, 2001). The employed machine learning is an exponentially growing field that has proved itself useful for complex multi-parameter tasks from image processing to chemical engineering (Iakovlev et al., 2019, Joutou and Yanai, 2009). The method has shown its best in facilitating routine data processing (Wan, Jiang, & Park, 2020) and also in the optimization of a semi-industrial process (Khabushev et al., 2019) and even catalyst design (Li, Wang, & Xin, 2018). In general, machine learning benefits multi-parametric and complex datasets that had been comprehended formerly by the human brain only. Moreover, computer vision alone cannot be fully indicative for controlling food; computer vision or machine-learning-based image analysis could be complimentary when combined with e-nose to objectively monitor the main attributes for consumer acceptability of food – odor and appearance (Di Rosa et al., 2017, Girolami et al., 2014, Keller et al., 2017). These methods also offer a contactless examination of the samples.
Chicken meat represented about 37% of global meat production in 2018 (FAO, 2018). Chicken is characterized by its pleasant odors and can be prepared using several cooking methods, which are primarily concerned with its safety, especially in the case of grilling (Hassan et al., 2010, Langsrud et al., 2020). During this process, chicken is subjected to high temperature, e.g., by burning charcoal for a certain time, depending on the desired characteristics of the final product. The changes in doneness state are accompanied both by the release of distinct odors and transformations in appearance due to complex chemical modifications occurring in chicken during the grilling. Chicken flavors result from the interaction between components found in the meat such as proteins, lipids, fatty acids, and others (Hassan, Magda, & Awad, 2010). The Maillard reaction, which occurs during heating leads to the appearance of volatile compounds such as aldehydes, ketones, acids, and alcohols (Jayasena et al., 2013, Mottram, 1998, Shi and Ho, 1994). Moreover, the development of cooked chicken flavors is greatly affected by the cooking environment, namely, by temperature and time (Coggins, 2012, Da Costa and Eri, 2012). Dolara et al. reported that mutagens were not produced in meat cooked at 100 °C (Dolara, Commoner, & Vithayathil, 1979), but were produced when the meat was cooked at temperatures of 190–210 °C. Furthermore, grilling has been reported to affect the level of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in chicken (Chung et al., 2011, Lee et al., 2016). Lan et al. found an increase in toxic and carcinogenic heterocyclic amine content with increasing heating time (Lan, Kao, & Chen, 2004).
Thus, the quality and safety of prepared meat primarily require new tools for control across the cooking process. Although there is an appearance of many volatile organic compounds (VOC), e-nose systems are barely applied in cooking. Moreover, computer vision and e-nose systems have not been yet combined to control food preparation processes like grilling, whilst such a technique might be very useful for automation of the cooking process and its precise control. In this study, we hypothesize that different cooking times result in different odor profiles and colors of grilled chicken, which could be detected using e-nose and computer vision techniques to evaluate and to predict the degree of readiness of the grilled chicken. Subsequently, we demonstrate the practicability of the combination of electronic nose and computer vision techniques for the cooking industry in comparison with a sensory evaluation.
