Spread dynamics have been studied for hundreds of years; Bernoulli developed one of the first known models inspired by the smallpox virus (Bernoulli, 1760). The importance of this problem has been highlighted recently by the COVID-19 pandemic, which spread across the world due to time-varying connections (Dong et al., 2020) and a possibly mutating virus. In this paper, we focus exclusively on susceptible–infected–susceptible (SIS) epidemiological models, which have been developed for both continuous (Ahn and Hassibi, 2013, Fall et al., 2007, Kermack and McKendrick, 1932, Mieghem et al., 2009) and discrete time domains (Ahn and Hassibi, 2013, Peng et al., 2010, Wang et al., 2003). SIS models consist of multiple agents, or subpopulations, that are either infected or healthy (susceptible) at any time t, and which may cycle (aperiodically) between these two states. The rate of infection combined with the connectivity of the ith agent to an infected neighbor j (denoted by βij) positively affects the probability of being infected, or proportion of the infected subpopulation, while the healing rate δi negatively affects the infection probability, or proportion of the infected subpopulation. This dynamic is depicted in Fig. 1(a). In this work, we focus on the group/subpopulation interpretation.
Competitive virus models, where each node can be infected by only one spreading process, have been motivated in the literature by competing viral strains (Nowak, 1991) and incompatible ideas spreading on different social networks (Sahneh & Scoglio, 2014), but they can also have broader applications to adoption of competing products, political stances, and alternative farming practices. The idea of two competitive SIS viruses, namely the bi-virus model, has been recently pursued in Karrer and Newman, 2011, Liu et al., 2016, Liu et al., 2019, Nowak, 1991, Prakash et al., 2012, Sahneh and Scoglio, 2014, Santos et al., 2015, Watkins et al., 2016 and Wei et al. (2013). Competitive SIS models were first introduced by Nowak in Nowak (1991), which is an extension of Kermack and McKendrick (1932), where the model considers the dynamics of three groups: (1) susceptible, (2) infected by virus one, and (3) infected by virus two. These dynamics were modeled using three differential equations where full connectivity of the agents is assumed (i.e., the infection graph is a complete graph), and where both viruses are assumed to be homogeneous. A virus is homogeneous if all agents have the same infection rate and healing rate. Otherwise, the virus is referred to as heterogeneous. In Watkins et al. (2016), Watkins et al. provide a necessary and sufficient condition for local exponential stability of the origin for two competing heterogeneous viruses over strongly connected graphs. In addition, a geometric programming problem is formulated, working toward optimal stabilization and rate control of the viruses. In Liu et al., 2016, Liu et al., 2019, Liu et al. provide global analysis for healthy and endemic states for the bi-virus model over strongly connected graphs and investigate distributed control techniques. The idea of information diffusion on two layered networks has also been explored using a susceptible–infected–recovered (SIR) model in Yagan et al. (2013). Additional two-virus work can be found in Ahn et al. (2006) and Funk and Jansen (2010).
The main motivations for studying the bi-virus model are those of competing viral strains (Nowak, 1991) and competing ideas spreading on different social networks (Sahneh & Scoglio, 2014). However, these models have broader applications to political stances, adaptation of competing products, competing practices in farming, etc., and can be generalized to more than two viruses. Consider, for example, the case of three competing viruses, for which each node has four possible conditions: susceptible, infected by virus 1, 2, or 3. This scenario is depicted in Fig. 1(b).Download : Download high-res image (161KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The ith node can be either in a susceptible or an infected condition (the summations are over j).
To the best of our knowledge, the only work that has considered more than two competing SIS viruses is presented in Xu et al. (2012), where Xu et al. propose a multi-virus model to capture the behavior of the spread of computer viruses. This model is different than the model we consider herein, in that it allows viruses to “rob” each other and requires the viruses to spread on the same static graph. In addition, the analysis presented in Xu et al. (2012) considers only the healthy state.
The modeling of mutating viruses has previously been addressed in Gubar and Zhu, 2013, Kutch and Gurfil, 2002 and Singh (2006). In Kutch and Gurfil (2002), Kutch and Gurfil introduce differential equations describing infection by viruses immune to different HIV drugs. In Singh (2006), Singh models virus mutation using the addition of another virus. In Gubar and Zhu (2013), Gubar and Zhu use evolutionary dynamics to model the virus mutations. To the best of our knowledge no work has been done on studying mutating viruses over nontrivial networks. In this work we model the mutating viruses by allowing the infection and healing rates to change over time, which we believe is novel.
Previous work on competing viruses has focused on non-mutating viruses over static graph structures, which we posit are not realistic given the dynamic nature of human contact networks. There are also recent results for single-virus models over time-varying networks (Bokharaie et al., 2010, Paré et al., 2015, Paré et al., 2018, Prakash et al., 2010, Rami et al., 2014, Schwarzkopf et al., 2010). Some of the ideas from Paré et al. (2018) will be employed in this paper and applied to a more general model. Additional work on virus spread over dynamic graph structures can be found in Fefferman and Ng (2007) and Volz and Meyers (2009).
Given an active outbreak, since agents in a population communicate with each other, it is possible they become aware of the virus and change their behavior in order to reduce susceptibility, which has been seen with the recent COVID-19 pandemic and social distancing (Lewnard & Lo, 2020). Virus spread models that account for human awareness have been studied in Funk et al., 2009, Granell et al., 2013, Liu et al., 2017, Ogura and Preciado, 2016, Paarporn et al., 2017, Sahneh and Scoglio, 2011, Sahneh and Scoglio, 2012 and Shakeri et al. (2015). The only work that includes human awareness with competing viruses is Liu et al. (2017), where only the bi-virus case is considered. In this work, we extend our results from Liu et al. (2017) to a more general scenario, which incorporates human awareness with multi-virus models.
Mathematical models of viruses are studied in order to understand the spreading behavior and to develop suppression and mitigation strategies that minimize the impact of outbreaks. Various control techniques have been applied to SIS virus systems (Liu et al., 2019, Vijayshankar and Roy, 2012, Wan et al., 2007, Wan et al., 2008, Watkins et al., 2016); these techniques regard the healing rate as a control variable. In Liu et al. (2019), it is shown that there exists no distributed linear feedback control that can stabilize the system, and in fact, such a control structure will destabilize the system. Alternative approaches focus on reducing the maximum eigenvalue of the linearized system using the healing rate and/or the infection rate. In Wan et al., 2007, Wan et al., 2008, distributed control techniques for setting healing rate and quarantine protocols are proposed and implemented on a severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) simulation model. In Vijayshankar and Roy (2012), a bound is provided for the cost of fairness of mitigating the spread of disease, that is, the difference between the optimal solution and the fair or homogeneous solution, for several classes of graphs. In Preciado et al. (2014), geometric programming ideas are used to control single SIS virus systems and the authors present a polynomial time algorithm illustrated on an air transportation network. In Watkins et al. (2016), ideas similar to those in Preciado et al. (2014) are applied to the bi-virus model. In Pasqualetti et al. (2014), a network control technique is applied to a discretized, linearized version of the model from Mieghem et al. (2009).
1.1. Paper contributionsIn this paper, we present a generalization of the bi-virus model from Liu et al. (2019) to include an arbitrary finite number of competing viruses, which is represented by a set of m ordinary differential equations (ODEs). We provide conditions for stability of the healthy state, where all viruses are eradicated, for competing viruses over static graphs as well as for mutating competing viruses over time-varying graph structures. We also explore the endemic states of the model by (1) providing sufficient conditions for stability of the case when only one virus survives, and (2) providing a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of parallel endemic states, meaning the equilibrium for each virus is a scaled version of the others. In order to capture more realistic behavior, we extend the model to incorporate human awareness, show that the extended model is well defined, determine the equilibria where the virus is eradicated, and present a set of sufficient conditions for the healthy states. Leveraging the stability results, we provide two control techniques based on minimizing the maximum eigenvalue of the linearized system. These control techniques, which are different from previous approaches in the literature, allow every agent to have a base healing rate and an additive control term. The corollaries, theorems, and control techniques are then illustrated via simulations.Some of the material in this paper was partially presented earlier in Paré et al. (2017); this paper provides a more comprehensive treatment of the work, expands to the case of mutating viruses, and includes human awareness. Specifically, the paper provides (1) a derivation of the multi-virus model in Section 2, interpreting each state variable of the model as the infection proportion of a group or subpopulation; (2) a presentation of the full probabilistic (m+1)n state model with a comparison to the ODE model via simulations; (3) complete proofs of all the results; (4) a new parallel equilibrium result (Theorem 6) that is both necessary and sufficient, including a generalization of earlier results only shown to be sufficient but herein proven to be necessary as well; (5) an extension of the model to include human awareness; (6) a relaxation of the control problems, no longer requiring a symmetric graph; and (7) additional illustrative simulations in Section 7, none which was included in Paré et al. (2017). The mutating, time-varying results in Section 3.2 are extensions of the single-virus work presented in Paré et al. (2018), but are extended to the case with mutating (time-varying) virus parameters. The analysis of the endemic states in Section 4 is based on extensions of the work in Liu et al., 2016, Liu et al., 2019; therefore we state some of the results as corollaries. The novelty in the work presented herein is the extension of the model to an arbitrary number of competing viruses and to capture mutating viruses and human awareness, and the proposed control techniques in Section 6.The paper is organized as follows. We first introduce in Section 2 the SIS model and derive the competing virus model for m viruses. In Sections 3 Stability analysis of the healthy state, 4 Stability analysis of the endemic states , we analyze the model, providing conditions for stability of the healthy state and the endemic states. In Section 5 we extend the multi-virus model to include human awareness and provide results on stability of the healthy states, and in Section 6, we provide an antidote control formulation. In Section 7, we present a set of illuminating simulations of various competing virus models over static and time-varying networks. We conclude in Section 8.
1.2. NotationFor any positive integer n, we use [n] to denote the set {1,2,…,n}. We view vectors as column vectors. We use xT and ‖x‖ to denote the transpose and the 2-norm of a vector x, respectively. The ith entry of a vector x will be denoted by xi. The ijth entry of a matrix A will be denoted by aij, and also by [A]ij when convenient. We use 0 and 1 to denote the vectors whose entries are all 0 and 1, respectively, and I to denote the identity matrix; dimensions of vectors and matrices are to be understood from the context. For any vector x∈Rn, we use diag(x) to denote the n×n diagonal matrix whose ith diagonal entry is xi. For any two sets A and B, we use A∖B to denote the set of elements in A but not in B.For any two real vectors a,b∈Rn, we write a≥b if ai≥bi for all i∈[n], a>b if a≥b and a≠b, and a≫b if ai>bi for all i∈[n]. For a real square matrix M, we use s(M) to denote the largest real part among its eigenvalues, i.e., s(M)=maxRe(λ):λ∈σ(M), where Re(⋅) is the real part of the argument and σ(M) denotes the spectrum of M, and ‖M‖ indicates the induced 2-norm of M (the maximum singular value of M). For a symmetric matrix M, we use λ1(M) to denote its largest eigenvalue. The notation 1a=b denotes the indicator function which takes value one if a equals b and zero otherwise. For 1A=b, where A is a matrix and b is a scalar, the result is a binary matrix of the same dimensions as A with entries 1aij=b.
