Transfer learning is efficient in solving the label insufficiency problem of sign predictions. Sign prediction is classification task [1], [2] that predicts signs for links of signed networks. Since the labels of signed network are sometimes not enough to train sign classifiers for sign prediction, knowledge from other networks is transferred to assist sign prediction. Mapping feature vectors in the source domain and target domain into a high-dimensional feature vectors space can get the common feature vectors as the transferable knowledge [3]. But the mapping courses need labels in target networks to assist so that they cannot work in sign-unknown networks. Besides, sparse coding can be used to reconstruct features in the source domain to train the classifier without target labels that can predict unknown labels. This is also an available method to predict unknown signs proposed in [4]. But it cannot remove considerable negative influence from noise and useless knowledge in the source domain and target domain. And all the direct transfer learning methods cannot overcome the knowledge transfer finding when the source domain and target domain are different (see Table 1).Table 1. Statistical information of the experimental datasets.OTCALPEPNSLDWIKNumber of nodes58813783131,82882,1407115Number of links35,59224,186841,372549,202103,689Average degree12.10412.78713.37212.76529.151Number of negative links11,9818890123,705124,13022,497Negative link ratio33.66%36.76%14.70%22.60%21.68%
Getting more useful knowledge among domains without any overlap knowledge is an important issue to be solved now, so some new transfer learning methods are proposed to deal with the problem. For example, transitive transfer learning (TTL) [5] transfers knowledge by involving an intermediate domain. Usually, the source domain and target domain are different, so there is a big gap in the distribution between them. TTL transfers knowledge from source domain to target domain via selecting an intermediate domain to propagate label information from source domain to target domain. However, the intermediate domain selection is not easy. Due to the sparsity of the signed network and the imbalance of sign distribution, the sign prediction performances of TTL are not always satisfactory. Existing works [6] select useful instances to address the sparsity of signed networks and the imbalance of sign distribution, but it may lose useful information in those discarded instances so that the prediction performances are sensitive to variety of signed networks.
To solve the problems of existing works, this paper propose a novel method which uses tri-domain relationship patterns (TDRP) to preserve more transferable knowledge and measure the differences among domains. TDRP constructs the triangle structures which are used to measure the similarity among three domains comprehensively. This pattern calculates the A-distance and domain complexity among the source and target to measure the domain difference. Then it selects the proper intermediate domain to be the “bridge” to transfer knowledge by combining the status theories. Thus, a general method of the “bridge” selection is given, and the knowledge can be transferred among domains that have no common knowledge directly. Although a transitive transfer learning method is proposed, they do not give the general intermediate domain selection rules. Also, TDRP finds the interference instances by the reconstruction error of the three-domain features. By eliminating the interference instances, the course of knowledge transfer can preserve more complete common knowledge. Compared with selecting instances method in SLA, the inference instances that are selected by TDRP preserve the most valuable instances on original domains.
The proposed Sign Prediction method based on TDRP (SP-TDRP) consists of two steps: 1) TDRP construction and 2) sign prediction. In the first step, the TDRP is constructed by each available three domains to measure the domain difference. The A-distance, domain complexity, and the reconstruction of the feature vectors in the three domains are calculated. Then the intermediate domain can be selected to transfer knowledge from the source domain to the target domain. And the inference instances also can be eliminated to make the transferable knowledge more complete and purer. In the second step, the sign prediction in the unlabeled target network can be transformed into a supervised classification task. With the transferable knowledge selected by TDRP, the classifier can be trained by the labeled instances and predict the target sign labels. The superior performance of this proposed TDRP is validated on realistic signed networks and the parameter stationary is also analyzed in later sections. All in all, the main contributions of this paper are three points:
•The Tri-Domain Relationship Pattern (TDRP) is proposed to measure the domain difference to solve the knowledge transfer problem among the domains that have no overlap knowledge.•TDRP measures the distribution relationship among domains by some cross-domain metrics and then gives a general intermediate domain selection method.•The interference instances are found by TDRP to select the transferable knowledge and eliminating the inference instances can preserve the more complete instances.•SP-TDRP has been validated on real signed networks and it performs better than existing relative methods and the optimal parameters setting in TDRP also be ensured.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the related works, Section 3 gives the problem definition, Section 4 presents the proposed SP-TDRP model in details, Section 5 gives the experimental results to evaluate the proposed model, and Section 6 summarizes this paper and points out the future works.
