In robotic and computer-integrated manufacturing, Computer Numerical Controlled (CNC) machining plays an important role for its higher machining efficiency and accuracy [1], in which various path planning strategies are proposed for machining the complex shaped workpiece [2]. Among different machining strategies, trochoidal (TR) milling occupies an important position due to its advantages of accelerating the cutting heat dissipation and reducing the cutting force [3]. In TR milling, the cutter moves in circular motions while at the same time also moves linearly, namely, the trajectory of cutter is a synthesis of circular and linear movements [4], as shown in Fig. 1, and, similar to flank milling [5,6], it is the side of the cutter that cuts the material. For a TR circular path, only the front half removes the material, while the back half is “empty-cutting”, and this cutting pattern helps reduce heat accumulation; besides, as it induces a gradually changing tool-workpiece engagement, the change of the resultant cutting force becomes smoother, thus avoiding any sharp impact on the machine tool [7]. Accordingly, TR milling is now widely used in manufacturing industries, especially for the high-speed machining (HSM) of some hard-to-cut parts (e.g., blisks made of titanium alloys) in aerospace industry.Download : Download high-res image (94KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Tool motion in trochoidal milling.
Abundant studies have been reported on TR milling in recent decades. Otkur and Lazoglu [4] first gave a detailed analysis on the tool motion of TR milling from the perspective of geometry and kinematics. At the same time, considering the mechanical and dynamic properties of TR milling, Kardes and Altintas [8] analyzed the vibration stability of circular milling based on the frequency domain and the time finite element analysis. Based on the typical linear milling force model, Wu et al. [9] built an improved cutting force model for analyzing the change of cutting force in a TR milling process. While from a different perspective, Wu et al. [10] built a TR machining force prediction model based on a characterization of the cutter-workpiece engagement. Later, Niaki et al. [11] gave a more elaborated study on the tool-workpiece engagement in TR milling, in which the geometry of the in-process workpiece in TR milling was analyzed in details and a more accurate TR milling force prediction model was given.
Aside from building a more accurate geometric model for the TR milling process, people have also studied the problem of how to improve the machining performance of TR milling. In the work of Wu et al. [12], a TR milling control strategy was proposed with consideration of the machining efficiency, cutting load and tool wear, and their research shows that it is more effective to control the cutting depth than feed rate for reducing the tool vibration and tool wear. For improving the machining efficiency, Rauch et al. [13] studied how to select the trochoidal parameters and how to design a TR tool path based on the dynamic performance of the machine tool. Targeting the machining stability issue, Yan et al. [14] built a TR milling process stability prediction model, in which the trochoidal step distance and the spindle speed were considered for analyzing the stability of TR milling, and a TR step optimization strategy was proposed to improve the machining efficiency subject to the required machining stability.
In addition, from the angle of enhancing the machinability of TR milling, various methods have been proposed. Elber et al. [15] gave a TR machining tool path generation method for pocket milling, in which the medial axis of pocket is taken as a reference for generating the trochoidal curve. By further employing the medial axis technique, Ibaraki et al. [16] utilized TR milling to machine the sharp corners in a complex pocket. Wang et al. [17] proposed a TR tool path for pocketing operation, in which a constant radial cutting depth is sought by means of adaptively adjusting the TR step and radius according to the pocket shape. In addition to the conventional circular TR cycle, Xu et al. [18] proposed to use polynomial curves as a basic TR cycle to machine arbitrary curved slots. Due to its flexibility, such a polynomial curve-based TR cycle could easily fit into a complex curved slot, and the tool-workpiece engagement could be adjusted with more flexibility to improve the machining efficiency. Based on [18], Li et al. [19] further extended such polynomial curve-based TR milling method for machining an arbitrary complex slot with a curved boundary and varying width.
While the above works provide a comprehensive coverage on the study of TR machining, they are nevertheless restricted to the traditional 2D TR milling. As for the (rough) machining of a deep 3D slot with curved boundary surfaces (e.g., a deep cavity on a blisk), currently it still mostly relies on the traditional approaches like plunge milling or zig-zag z-level milling, which easily encounter the issues of accelerated cutting heat accumulation, severe tool wear, drastic cutting force variation, etc., which are particularly problematic when cutting extremely hard materials such as titanium alloy. It is plausible to explore the potential of extending the TR milling technique from 2D to 3D, and that is the subject of this paper. Specifically, in this paper, we present a multi-layer five-axis TR tool path generation method for machining a genuine 3D deep curved slot (e.g., a curved groove on a blisk), wherein the 3D slot is first optimally partitioned into multiple curved layers and for each layer an efficient TR tool path is generated. Both computer simulation and physical cutting experiments are carried out by the authors, and the results confirm the desired advantages of the proposed 3D TR milling method.
This paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we will first introduce the general idea of layer partitioning of a 3D curved slot, followed by a detailed account on how to generate an efficient TR tool path for a given single layer. Then, in Section 3, aiming at maximizing the machining efficiency subject to the given constraints on tool deflection and tool stress (both of which due to the cutting force), we elaborate on how to optimally partition the slot into non-uniform layers as well as how to determine the critical machining parameters of the TR tool path for each layer. Finally, in Section 4, we present the experimental results in both computer simulation and physical cutting of the proposed TR machining method on two representative deep slots, followed by the conclusion in Section 5.
