Social relations influence individual outcomes in virtually all segments of society, including workplaces (Venkataramani et al., 2013), corporate boards (Westphal and Milton, 2000), entrepreneurial markets (Burt, 2009), healthcare institutions (Cunningham et al., 2012), rural and urban neighborhoods (Beggs et al., 1996), political groups (Johnson and Orbach, 2002), judiciary groups (Lazega et al., 2006), and criminal gangs (Morselli, 2010). The effects of peer relations on students in education have particularly attracted the attention of researchers in the past decades (e.g. Coleman, 1961; Sacerdote, 2011; Veenstra and Dijkstra, 2011). Peer social networks have been shown to matter for students’ health behaviors (Simpkins et al., 2013; Haas and Schaefer, 2014), delinquency (Sijtsema and Lindenberg, 2018; Gallupe et al., 2019), empathy (Wölfer et al., 2012), career decisions (Anelli and Peri, 2017; Raabe et al., 2019), and academic achievement (Gremmen et al., 2019; Stadtfeld et al., 2019).
Collecting detailed and high-quality social network data is crucial to develop our understanding of how peer relations evolve and affect individual outcomes, such as the success and well-being of students. However, as social processes at school are highly complex, network data collection remains a major challenge for educational research to date. In particular, the fact that social networks are multidimensional and dynamic presents difficulties for empirical studies and data collection (e.g. Magnani and Wasserman, 2017; Lazega and Snijders, 2015). First, peer relations in the classroom or school are complex and take many different forms. Students may have friends and rivals, contacts within and outside of their class or cohort, and/or strong and weak relationships. The different types of social ties may be interrelated (Vörös and Snijders, 2017). For instance, students may perceive their friends as smart and funny, but less so those they dislike. Joint activities and time spent together strengthen the ties between individuals, but belonging to different groups may weaken them.
Second, these multidimensional peer relations change over time. This may be due to external factors, such as the arrival of a new classmate, a change in the curriculum, or developmental processes (exogenous change), or due to the structure of peer social networks themselves (endogenous change; Snijders et al., 2010). Moreover, the different dimensions of social ties might not change at the same pace. While close friendships or group perceptions may take months or years to develop, who one studies or spends free time with may change in the course of a few weeks or days (Kitts, 2014). In summary, studies that aim to understand the development and effects of social networks in schools need to collect data on multiple types of peer relations over time, and they should consider that important processes may occur on quite different time scales.
A number of data collection methods have been applied in educational research and beyond to tackle the issues of multidimensionality and dynamics in network data, which have specific strengths and weaknesses. Surveys and interviews are perhaps the most popular techniques to gather information on peer social relations and educational outcomes (e.g. Coleman, 1961; Snijders and Baerveldt, 2003). Relying on self-reports of social interactions and relations, these methods allow the large-scale collection of multidimensional and longitudinal network data, such as in the Add Health (Harris, 2013), the CILS4EU (the German and Swedish samples; Kalter et al., 2013), the KiVa (in Finland: Sentse et al., 2014; in The Netherlands: Rambaran et al., 2019), the PROSPER (Osgood et al., 2013), the SNARE (Laninga-Wijnen et al., 2019), and the RECENS (Boda and Néray, 2015) studies. However, due to cognitive limits and recall biases (e.g. Bernard et al., 1982; Marsden, 1990), the types of relationships surveyed and the maximal frequency of data collection rounds are rather low. Especially for questions regarding weekly, daily, or even hourly interactions, regular surveys are impractical.
The experience sampling method is more suitable to measure short-term dynamics with surveys or interviews, for instance, by asking students about important interactions of the past day at random times or every evening (Reis and Wheeler, 1991). In turn, the scope of these short surveys are necessarily limited and they cannot be repeated over long periods, such as months or years. Answering the same questions over a long time may lead to response fatigue and high rates of non-response.
A more recent approach to circumvent the limitations of regular survey designs employs digital technologies in an attempt to collect more “objective” data. Social sensor techniques rely on, for example, Bluetooth via smartphones (Sekara et al., 2016), Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology (Cattuto et al., 2010), or other sensor technologies such as infrared signals (Pentland and Heibeck, 2008) to collect fine-grained observational data on collocation and interactions between students. Social sensors do not need the attention of the participants, thus they can attenuate response fatigue and provide acurate data with high temporal resolution. Although data from social sensors and self-reports are positively correlated, sensor measures convey unique information that is otherwise difficult or impossible to gather (Eagle et al., 2009; Elmer et al., 2019). The direct observation of individual behavior allows to overcome measurement biases associated with self-reports (Bernard et al., 1982) and refocus research attention on social action (Baumeister et al., 2007). On the downside, social sensors are not suitable for measuring multiple types of social ties, only interactions based on physical proximity, and their use in studies with long data-collection periods may be technically difficult or infeasible due to limitations related to e.g. battery life, correct and regular use by participants, and malfunctions (although see Sekara et al., 2016).
Data from online social media platforms can fill these gaps, as they may provide real-time information on multiple types of social relations and interactions, even over longer time periods. Studies of online social networks have shown that these measures meaningfully complement measures of offline relations, and may provide, for example, different views on ethnic and gender segregation (Wimmer and Lewis, 2010; Hofstra et al., 2017). However, such contexts only record digital communication, ignoring offline social ties, while the two can only jointly provide a complete picture of interpersonal relations. Further, the algorithmic design and sampling of these platforms is often obscure, limiting data interpretability (e.g. Morstatter et al., 2013). Finally, as social media activity is highly sensitive information, it may be challenging for researchers to get participants, data providers, and ethics committees on board with gathering such data.
Finally, field experiments and network interventions have been used in combination with some of the strategies described above in order to better understand the effects of social networks on student behavior and outcomes (Valente, 2012; Hamm et al., 2014). While these interventions may pertain to multidimensionality and network dynamics, their effects should be studied on various time scales. As we have pointed out, this is difficult using data that come from only one of the above data collection strategies. Besides that, successful experiments and interventions often require the support of not only participants but institutional stakeholders as well, which may be challenging to acquire.
While each of the network data collection methods discussed previously has specific strengths, we argue that none of these techniques provide a complete picture of social network processes in educational settings on their own. Yet, their combination seems to be a promising way to uncover processes in multidimensional networks occurring at multiple time scales. This is precisely the strategy we followed in the Swiss StudentLife Study (SSL Study). Previous network studies have combined some data collection techniques in educational settings, such as surveys, phone call records, and social sensors (Eagle et al., 2009; Sekara et al., 2016) or surveys and social media sources (Hofstra et al., 2017). Our work contributes to this field by exploring a study design in which the strength of each data collection method helps to overcome the limitations of the others.
In this article, we present the research design and data collection strategy of the SSL Study. The study was conducted in three cohorts of engineering undergraduate students (N1 = 226, N2 = 261, N3 = 660) at a Swiss university in 2016−2019. The data collection aimed at providing insights into the multidimensional and dynamic nature of social networks and their effects on the well-being, motivation, and academic success of students. The emergence and development of student communities were followed from the very first day they met throughout their first academic years. As a key strength of our study, social networks and student outcomes were measured on various dimensions and time scales, by the combination of regular network surveys, experience sampling techniques, social sensor technologies, social media data sources, and field experiments. The approach and research design can be useful to collect multidimensional and dynamic network data both in education and across various other social contexts. In the following, we provide an overview of the student cohorts, the research design and the measures, then we discuss practical challenges and solutions in four areas that were key to the success of our project: study design, research ethics, communication, and population definition.
