Due to the rapid growth in importance and impact of digital evidence worldwide, today the credibility of digital multimedia such as images and videos, has grown immense. The use of digital multimedia is ever-increasing in the day-to-day life of every common man. Among different forms of multimedia data, digital videos form a major source of evidence for any event in media, broadcast and legal industries. However, digital videos today, are highly vulnerable to various forms of modification and manipulation attacks, especially with the widely available cheap video-editing software and tools. The threat to authenticity of digital videos has further increased with the wide circulation of videos online on a day-to-day basis, a large part of which is comprised of video sharing on social networks. With this, the phenomenon of “fake video going viral” has become notably common today, especially in social media platforms. Hence, digital videos before being considered legally, essentially require undergoing an authentication check and modification detection. Any given video, cannot be trusted blindly as evidence to events/circumstances. Tampered/manipulated videos are capable enough to adversely impact the political views, law and order of an entire nation. In this paper, we deal with the detection of inter-frame video forgeries, utilizing digital forensic techniques.
In this work, we focus on video forensics for authentication and integrity verification of digital videos. Based on the analysis technique, digital forensics can be categorized into active and passive/blind forensic measures. While the active forensic methods require pre-computation of information (such as watermark, hash, digital signature), implemented with specialized hardware chips and embedded software, the passive forensic measures are entirely post-processing based, and do not require any prior information computation or storage. In particular, video forensic techniques exploit the intrinsic spatio-temporal fingerprints of a video to test its authenticity, and detect any form of malicious attacks on the video.
1.1. Digital videos: Formation and storage basicsA digital video is a sequence of still images, called frames, which are captured continuously at a predefined constant frame rate, to create the illusion of motion, exploiting the persistence of the human visual system (HVS). To optimize storage space requirement, raw videos are encoded in compressed file formats like MPEG-1, MPEG-2, MPEG-4, H.264 and H.265. Since, adjacent frames of a video sequence are highly correlated to each other, digital videos may be encoded in spatial domain (like JPEG compression [1] in images) as well as temporal domain to optimize redundancy. To reduce the temporal redundancy in videos, Motion Vectors (MVs) [2] are used during the video encoding process. MVs are used to represent the macroblocks in a video frame. MVs are computed based on the position of a macroblock in the current frame and its reference frame. The H.264/MPEG-4 AVC standard defines motion vector as [2]: “motion vector: A two-dimensional vector used for inter prediction that provides an offset from the coordinates in the decoded picture to the coordinates in a reference picture”. Motion Vector can be distinguished into two categories based on its estimation technique: (a) Forward Motion Vector (FMV), where the reference frame is a preceding frame, and (b) Backward Motion Vector (BMV), where the reference frame is a succeeding frame.A compressed video comprises of three types of frames: I-frame (Intra-frame), P-frame (Predicted frame) and B-frame (Bi-directional predicted frame). I-frames are encoded with JPEG compression. A P-frame is predicted from its predecessor I/P-frame(s) (known as a forward predicted frame); and a B-frame is predicted from its predecessor I/P and successor P-frame(s). I-frames assume the highest quality and lowest compression ratio. Hence, I-frames are the major carriers of information for any video sequence. B-frames attain the highest compression ratio and the lowest quality, as compared to I and P frames in a video sequence.A video sequence is splitted into segments, called GOP (group of pictures). The number of frames within a GOP is called GOP size or GOP length [3] of the video. A GOP consists of one I-frame and multiple P and B frames. Basic video codec standards like MPEG-1 and MPEG-2, support only fixed-size GOP, which affect the quality as well as compression ratio of the video. To overcome this problem, advanced video codecs like H.264 [3], support adaptive (variable) GOP size, where the size of GOP is set by the encoder itself depending on the amount of motion content in a scene.Each frame is further divided into macroblocks (MBs), which are mainly three types: (a) Intra-macroblock (I-MB) (b) Predicted-macroblock (P-MB), and (c) Skipped-macroblock (S-MB). I-MBs are encoded without information from temporal prediction; whereas P-MBs are encoded with temporal prediction based on motion vectors. Again, P-MB can be classified into three types based on the Motion Vectors: (a) forward P-MBs (those that are predicted from preceding frame(s) using the forward MVs), (b) backward P-MBs (those that are predicted from succeeding frame(s) using backward MVs) and, (c) bidirectional P-MBs (those which used both FMVs and BMVs, averaged out). S-MBs do not need encoding but are directly copied from the neighboring frames. I-frames consist only of I-MBs, whereas P-frames contain I-MBs as well as forward P-MBs and S-MBs. But, B-frames contains all types of MBs, i.e., I-MBs, forward P-MBs, backward P-MBs, bidirectional P-MBs and S-MBs.
1.2. Attack modelIn this paper, we deal with the detection of inter-frame video forgeries [4], which are purely temporal domain forms of attacks on videos, such as frame deletion, insertion, shuffling and duplication attacks. (The other form of video forgery is intra-frame forgery, which comprises spatial/spatio-temporal video manipulations [5].) However, state-of-the-art intra-frame forgery detection techniques such as [5], [6] are unable to detect the inter-frame forgeries in videos; given that, inter-frame video forgeries only alter the position of frames in the temporal domain, without manipulating any frame content in the spatial domain, of a video sequence.Inter-frame video forgeries are mainly delivered by an attacker, against continuous monitoring or surveillance systems. Such attacks are completely post-incidental, where a captured footage is tampered by an insider or outsider (possibly through remote access).Download : Download high-res image (734KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Example of inter-frame forgeries in sample surveillance video sequence. (a) Authentic video sequence (shown at an inter-leaving of 50 frames); (b) Forged video sequence by frame deletion operation. (c) Forged video sequence by frame duplication operation. (d) Forged video sequence by frame insertion operation.In such attacks, some (significant) video frames are completely omitted (frame deletion attack) to remove traces of certain events from the surveillance output, or some frames are newly inserted, duplicated or reshuffled (frame insertion, duplication or reshuffling attacks) to fool an observer in believing a false sequence of activities having been captured in the video. Note here that, frame reshuffling is nothing but a combination of frame deletion, insertion and duplication actions.Fig. 1 presents an example of inter-frame forgeries on a sample surveillance video sequence, where we have shown eight frames of the video, at an inter-leaving of frames, and their corresponding forged versions. Fig. 1(a) shows the sequence of authentic frames, depicting a man and two women. The resultant of frame deletion forgery at some specific locations (151 to 229), has been shown in Fig. 1(b), which shows only the women. Fig. 1(c) presents a frame duplication forgery scenario, where it appears that the man enters the scene two times, instead of one. Here, frame numbers 151 to 225 are copied and introduced after frame location 296. Frame insertion forgery is shown in Fig. 1(d), where frames 51 to 150 are inserted into the authentic video sequence.Such illegitimate modification to videos is made possible due to high correlation among frames generated in continuous monitoring or surveillance videos, since such videos capture a specific (small) geographic area, continuously. Such attacks, though extremely low-cost and computationally simple to carry out, are one of the biggest threats to video authenticity and credibility, specially for surveillance videos.
1.3. Our contributionsIn this work, we propose a digital forensic technique for detection of inter-frame forgeries in videos, which include frame insertion, deletion and duplication attacks. Our investigation is based on the exploitation of compressed domain footprints in videos, to detect the above forms of forgeries. Specifically, we exploit the variation of prediction footprints in P-frames to detect abnormalities in a video sequence. The detected abnormalities are further investigated, taking into account the variation of forward and backward motion vectors in B-frames of the videos, hence leading to exact forged frame localization in (forged) videos, while optimizing the false positive rate. The proposed model is capable of identifying the specific form(s) of video forgery (frame insertion, deletion or duplication) carried out.Majority of the state-of-the-art inter-frame forgery detection techniques such as [7], [8], are applicable to video with fixed GOP size. The technique proposed in [8], relies on an excessively strict assumption, that the GOP size of two successive compressions (before and after forgery) must be different. However, later on, Stamm et al. [9] extended the work of [7], and overcame the fixed GOP restriction. They [9] improved the method efficiently, for videos with fixed as well as adaptive GOP sizes. However, both the techniques ([7] and [9]) fail to localize the exact location of frame manipulation in a video.In this work, we aim to overcome the above limitations of inter-frame video forgery detection and localization, present in the current state-of-the-art. Hence, the proposed technique is entirely independent of GOP size, and also capable of identifying the exact location(s) of forgery within a video. We have demonstrated the tamper detection and localization capabilities of the proposed method through extensive experimentation on a wide range of test videos, on varying compression methods and ratios.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present an overview of the existing related work. In Section 3, the proposed inter-frame video forensic model has been presented and described in detail, with the help of an example application. Our implementation and experimental results have been presented in Section 4. We conclude the paper and point to future research directions in Section 5.
