In the current cyberspace environment, network infrastructure plays a key role in promoting social development. Driven by commercial benefits, network infrastructure has become the main target of network attacks. Especially in the current cyberspace, network attacks are becoming more complicated, organized and targeted. Various advanced, continuous, and targeted network attacks (called APT, Advanced Persistent Threat) occur frequently, posing a serious threat to cyberspace security [2], [43]. Counteracting against APT attacks has emerged as a key issue to cope with for the security community.
In order to detect APT attacks, researchers currently attempt to mine hidden anomalous behaviors by leveraging the network traffic or security log information, or to find the footprints of APT attacks by performing correlation analysis on security alarm events [2], [31], [22]. However, it is not easy for ordinary researchers to obtain network traffic or security log information due to the security and privacy requirements. Therefore, we need to explore other ways to carry out APT attack research. Similar to traditional network attacks, APT attackers need to employ malware as the attack weapon to launch cyberspace attacks. For this reason, it provides a feasible method for us to conduct APT attack research by analyzing the malware deployed in the APT attacks.
In the research of malware, researchers generally employ dynamic analysis to extract the dynamic system call information from malware, to describe its behavioral characteristics. Our previous research [14], [16] has proved that the dynamic system call information can not only be leveraged to accurately detect the obfuscated malware, but also to explain the malicious behaviors reasonably, which lays a promising foundation for the research of APT malware. In addition to leveraging dynamic system call information, this paper introduces the ontology model to construct the knowledge representation for APT malware, to build the systematic cognition framework of APT malware and attacks.
The approach proposed by this paper is an effective supplement to traditional APT detection methods based on network traffic and security log information analysis, which can implement accurate detection of APT malware and effective description of its malicious behaviors without the condition of network traffic and security log information. In addition, we can gain comprehensive insights into the attack intentions of APT malware, and establish the accurate and systematic cognition framework of APT attacks. The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:
(1)We propose an effective approach to detect APT malware based on dynamic behavior characteristics. We first extract the dynamic API sequence from APT malware, and then calculate the classification contribution of APIs and sort the API sequence, finally realize effective detection and family classification of APT malware. The accuracy of detection and classification can reach up to 99.28% and 98.85% respectively.(2)We leverage the ontology model to describe the behavioral characteristics of APT malware, construct the ontological knowledge framework for APT malware, realize an easy-to-understand description of the APT attacks, and gain in-depth insights into the maliciousness of APT malware families.(3)We conduct comprehensive evaluations based on real APT malware samples and make a synthesized comparison with similar studies, which proves that the proposed approach demonstrates a promising practical performance, and the research results can provide a valuable reference for cyberspace security community.
