Influenza-like illness (ILI), defined as a medically diagnosed condition caused by influenza or other diseases, refers to acute respiratory infections caused by influenza virus or otherpathogens, such as parainfluenza virus and adenovirus. The disorder shares clinical manifestations with influenza viruses. According to the WHO surveillance case definition, ILI is defined as an acute respiratory infection, fever ≥ 38 °C and cough symptoms, and onset within the last ten days.
The issue of influenza is a direct and far-reaching problem, ranging from the health problems of the people to the socio-economic stability, which may cause a major blow to the entire society because the flu epidemic is not controlled. For example, in 2009, H1N1 occurred in the world. According to data released by the World Health Organization, more than 1.3 million confirmed cases of H1N1 in the world, and the death toll was more than 14,000. This incident is a big challenge to the epidemic prevention mechanisms all over the world. In Taiwan, many preventive measures have been taken in response to the outbreak, such as strict border controls, transfer, and storage of medical resources, epidemic prevention operations at public transportation bases, and campuses, which consumed a lot of labor costs and money in the above operations. The above examples can prove that the issues of the influenza epidemic have a profound and long-term impact on the safety of people’s lives and property, human resources, material, and social and economic stability. If we can make an effective trend forecast for the Influenza-like illness, it can provide more response time for relevant units. So that people can take precautions against individual conditions in advance, which will have a positive impact on the prevention and control of influenza-like epidemics [1], [2].
Environmental data such as air pollution and temperature and humidity have a considerable impact on the ILI [3]. Highly polluted air may irritate the human bronchus after being inhaled by patients, and prolonged exposure may also induce the occurrence of ILI [4]. In addition, ILI has a greater chance of occurring in highly sensitive groups such as the elderly and children [5], and these highly sensitive groups have a particularly large impact on weather changes. They have a higher probability of becoming patients with ILI when the temperature of the day and night changes drastically or the weather conditions are unstable. By adding air pollution and temperature and humidity environmental data, it is possible to take advantage of the natural time delay between the patient’s exposure to the adverse environment and the onset of the disease to achieve an early estimation of ILI. At the same time, it can also include situations where highly sensitive populations are prone to induce influenza-like diseases to specific environmental factors. It makes the prediction results of this study provide more accurate help for needier objects. Our research uses the Outbreak threshold algorithm published by the World Health Organization. The algorithm calculates the threshold for influenza-like visits at various time points this year. Through this standard, the visit rate data is no longer just a number, but there is an actual upper limit of the value to judge whether an Outbreak of ILI has occurred. This standard is used as auxiliary information for training and a benchmark for judging when the subsequent data is visualized.
Our goal is to provide a reliable ILI trend forecasting system that integrates ILI consultation data, air pollution indicators, temperature, and humidity environmental data. This study uses deep learning technology to build models for training, using the concept of integrated learning, adding a stacking method, and combining the individual advantages of the model to predict the rate of ILI consultations in the next six weeks. Then combine the prediction results with the outbreak threshold to determine the class Status of the flu epidemic. This study visualizes the results on the system web page to contribute to users of various backgrounds and achieve the goals that can be used by government agencies, the elderly, children, and other highly sensitive ethnic groups. The specific objectives of the ILI trend prediction system we proposed are as follows:

1.Data integration ILI consultation rate, air pollution and environmental data are stored in the database, and data missing value filling and time unit integration are completed.2.Construct Deep Learning models, train historical data, and extract deep weights from the data.3.Add the concept of Ensemble Learning, use the stacking method, and combine the advantages of multiple models to provide model prediction performance.4.Add real-time data to predict future ILI consultation rate, and improve the prediction time without sacrificing too much accuracy.5.Calculate the Outbreak threshold as a clear epidemic assessment indicator, and provide a clear quantitative indicator for the epidemic trend.
The contributions of this paper are the following. We construct a framework that provides real-time data to predict future ILI consultation rates. The outbreak indicator was calculated as a clear epidemic assessment indicator and a clear quantitative indicator for the epidemic trend. The concept of Ensemble Learning was applied using the stacking method, and combine the advantages of multiple models to provide excellent model prediction performance. Also, the data set extracted from the combination of the ILI consultation rate, air pollution, and environmental data.
