DNA Microarray is a modern biological research technology for analyzing gene expression. This technology (DNA Microarray) has the possibility to measure the expression levels of thousands of genes during important biological processes and gives the ability to diagnose cancer based on gene expression (Chang et al., 2005, Jeffrey et al., 2005). Given the very high number of genes, it is useful to select a limited number of genes relevant to the classification of tissue samples. The analyzing expression profiles of multiple genes provides an opportunity to illuminate some aspects of functional genomics.
DNA microarray studies are used to discover which specific genes are important for the development of a disease. They are used to analyze gene expression data associated with a specific diagnosis. Computational analysis and computer science can help researchers assemble a group of gene signatures for a given disease (Buturović, 2005, Wang et al., 2004). However, gene expression data obtained from microarray are usually contained a very large number of genes and a few numbers of samples. To obtain a good classification accuracy, it is important to select the most pertinent genes that are needed and sufficient to describe the target concept. In addition, gene selection is also a procedure for reducing the input dimension, resulting in a much lower computational burden on the classifier (Mudaliar, Patil, Thete, & Moholkar, 2015).
The challenge of high-dimensional data analysis is to extract information about the disease from a huge amount of redundant data and noise. It is important to select a small subset of microarray data for accurate classification. All this motivates researchers to search for possible solutions and to propose various algorithms. In order to obtain the best accuracy in gene selection problem and to achieve this goal, various evolutionary and bio-inspired algorithms have been applied.
Moreover, many bio-inspired algorithms have been proposed in the literature in recent years (see Section 2). Moth Flame Optimization Algorithm (MFOA) was one of the most recent bio-inspired methods that quickly became well-known for its superior performance in solving many optimization problems. However, to our knowledge, this is the first attempt at applying the MFOA-based as a gene selection and classification of DNA Microarray data. MFOA was generally used for its guaranty transition between exploration and exploitation, faster convergence and better time complexity.
In this paper, we propose a new algorithm called Mutual Information Maximization – modified Moth Flame Algorithm (MIM-mMFA). MIM-mMFA is proposed to investigate and improve the performance of gene selection. For this purpose, we propose a hybrid model that uses several techniques: Mutual information maximization (MIM), Moth Flame Optimization Algorithm (MFOA) combined with a Support Vector Machine (SVM) with Leave One Out Cross Validation (LOOCV), and the number of selected genes. Our approach has three particular features. First, for high dimensional data, we use a pre-processing MIM to handle this difficulty. Second, mMFA uses three procedures, one for the presentation of individual, another for moth movement and the last is a new fitness function (an SVM with LOOCV classifier). Finally, the main objective of mMFA is to select the best gene subset from among the predictive gene subsets, which is evaluated with the SVM classifier to provide high classification accuracy. For the performance of our proposal, we apply an SVM classifier to the best subset of genes selected by the MIM-mMFA. In order to test the accuracy of the proposed methodology, we used sixteen binary class and multi-class gene expression microarray datasets and compared our results with those obtained with other recently published algorithms. Experimental results showed that the MIM-mMFA achieves a better performance of classification accuracy with a competitive average of the number of selected genes for solving the gene selection problem in both binary class and multi-class.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: The next section presents a brief literature survey of the work performed for gene selection. Section 3 describes briefly the proposed method. Section 4 presents experimental results and discussion. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section 5.
