1.1. Social issues behind mobile phones’ batteriesToday it is difficult to imagine modern life without electronic devices like smartphones and tablets. Amongst the elements employed to construct these devices the cobalt occupies a central place because it is used in the battery. It is classified as a critical mineral in the European Union because it is almost absent in the EU territory and must be imported (European Commission, 2011).The source of the majority of cobalt employed in the world today, 90,000 over a total of 140,000 metric tons of mine production in 2018, is the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) (Shedd, 2019). Today, cobalt mining in the DRC encompasses child labour (e.g. Faber et al., 2017), accidents and occupational hazards, even violent conflict and death (e.g. Sovacool, 2019). Child miner's salary in DRC is no higher than 2$/day according to Amnesty International research, and children working in cobalt mining are exposed to abuses and violence (Amnesty International, 2016).Cobalt mining also encompasses an enormous environmental deterioration that threatens human health in the regions due to increased concentrations of this mineral in water, soil and fish (Banza et al., 2009, 2018). Children are especially vulnerable to environmental exposure since they exhibit a higher level of cobalt concentration in urine than adults do in polluted areas nearby mines (Cheyns et al., 2014).
1.2. Mobile phone recycling in EuropeThe principles of circular economy, promoted from all instances for increasing sustainability of non-renewable primary products used in smartphones, emphasize the R-imperatives that Reike et al. (2018) synthesize in 10RO framework (for 10 value retention options): Refuse (buying), Reduce, Re-sell/reuse, Repair, Refurbish, Re-manufacture, Re-purpose (rethink; use old components for new uses), Recycle, Recover (buy and use energy), Re-mine (landfilled material; buy and use secondary materials). Other authors follow Circular Economy 4R scheme of Reduce, Reuse, Remanufacture and Recycle (Bressanelli et al., 2020). Old or obsolete electronic products (Waste Electric and Electronic Equipment, WEEE) should be recycled after their first life for reusing their components; however, current estimates of end-of-life recycling rate of the cobalt are not higher than 32% (OECD, 2019). Main barriers to recycling battery components are inefficient WEEE collection, technological challenges in recycling operations, and low demand of recycled products that may be seen as “used” (Church and Wuennenberg, 2019). The lack of public awareness about WEEE recycling has been identified as one of the main barriers that make WEEE management implementation difficult (Kumar and Dixit, 2018). For Church and Wuennenberg (2019), inefficient collection of post-first-life products is also due to the lack of infrastructure for dropping off those products, but the lack of awareness seems to be the most important cause.Hibernation, or the period of time when a product is kept after it has been used, can be very long or permanent for electronic devices. As an example, Danish consumers keep as many as 2.9 (Penners et al., 2018) to 5 (Tanskanen, 2013) used cell phones at home in average, as spare phones or fearing privacy disclosures (Penners et al., 2018). In the UK about 33% of mobile phones are returned for recycling (Wilson et al., 2017). The percentage is much lower in Spain, with more than 90% of appliances and devices unavailable for reuse and recycling (Bovea et al, 2018). Mobile phones are by far the most kept category, and the main reason stated for device hibernation is to have it as spare parts; less than 10% are taken to a civic amenity site for adequate management as electronic waste (Bovea et al., 2018).Application of financial incentives for encouraging consumers to recycle has been proposed (Abila and Kantola, 2019; Shevchenko et al., 2019). Alternatively, increasing population awareness about sustainability is a widely employed strategy for increased recycling of different materials like glass, metal, paper, plastic, textile (Hole and Hole, 2020). Accordingly, education for sustainability often focuses on recycling (e.g. Cheung et al., 2018; Hofverberg and Maivorsdotter, 2018; Buil et al, 2019). Considering also other R-imperatives is desirable. In a recent review, Bressanelli et al. (2020) found that Circular Economy in the WEEE industry needs to explore how all the R-imperatives can create value to end-users, and establish the right incentives for take-back systems, amongst others. In this study we will look for incentives to Reduce and Recycle. Specifically, we will design an intervention to be applied in educational contexts.
1.3. Empathy for sustainable behavioursSustainability empathy has been defined as one's ability to establish an emotional connection with the surrounding people and environment (Font et al., 2016, and cites therein). If a tourist feels positive emotions and empathy towards a place and people living there, they will care about and exhibit sustainable behaviour (Font et al., 2016). Batson et al. (2002) found that empathy with a stigmatized individual increased positive attitudes and action on behalf of stigmatized groups, that is, altruist behaviour. This can be expanded to pro-environmental and sustainable behaviours. Here we will use that model and the interaction of social affect and cognition (Preckel et al., 2018). Preckel et al. (2018) showed that, although socio-affective and socio-cognitive routes to understanding others are separated in the brain, they are jointly required for adaptive social behaviour. On the other hand, Decety and Cowell (2015) described affective sharing (automatic mirroring of other's emotions), empathic concern (motivation of caring), and perspective-taking (capacity of putting oneself in the other's skin, which is the cognitive aspect of empathy) as empathy components. Pro-social behaviour is mediated, also in non-human animals, from different components of empathy like affective sharing and empathic concern (Decety et al., 2016). Individual differences in cognitive empathy and empathic concern predict sensitivity to justice for others (Decety & Yoder, 2016); affective sharing alone is not sufficient because the distress caused by other´s pain can be avoided simply looking the other way.From the theories above, the emotional connection with children working in DRC mines will be stronger activating multiple empathy components. This may be achieved using interventions that contain different amounts of empathy components. Sharing affective states with another person and feeling concern for another are also separated at conceptual and neural levels (Preckel et al., 2018). Batson (2009) described “Imagine-self” (imagining oneself in the other's situation) and “Imagine-other” instructions (imagining how the other person feels) as efficient techniques to induce perspective-taking, although they do not activate exactly the same emotional empathy components. “Imagine-self” instructions activate both empathic concern and the sense of self-other overlap (feeling like the other feels), while “Imagine-other” activates empathic concern but not so much the sense of self-other overlap (Myers et al., 2013). Thus, interventions based on putting oneself in the other's situation would induce empathy using more emotional aspects, and for equal cognitive empathy would be more efficient than “Imagine-other” interventions at promoting sustainable behaviours.
1.4. Role-playRole-play is a type of game that has been widely and successfully employed for varied purposes, such as reducing students’ racial prejudices (e.g. McGregor, 1993), decreasing persistent stereotypes of scientists (Howes and Cruz, 2009), engaging university students in understanding the impacts of climate change in their cities and lives (Kluver et al., 2018), learning therapeutic skills in Master training programs for clinical psychologists (Ruiz Rodriguez et al., 2018), developing environmental values in children (Lithoxoidou et al., 2017) and many others. Based on their effective contribution to behaviour change, role-playing games have been also proposed out of educational contexts, as a way of public engagement in so-called “Serious games”. Examples are the creation of spaces for mutual understanding in controversial issues like housing development (Doberstein, 2020); to reduce stigma of the homeless (Schrier, 2018); to support interventions for the reduction of household carbon emissions (Agusdinata and Lukosh, 2019); to educate and engage communities in adaptation to climate change (Rumore et al., 2016), and others.Role-play simulation pushes participants to engage with issues from a different perspective (Rumore et al., 2016). In this sense, role-play could be considered a way of “Imagining-self”, but it is more than that because it contains more psychological elements that contribute to behaviour changes. During the game the player adopts not only the perspective but also the behavior expected from a particular role (Peng et al., 2010). Player enjoyment also explains part of the success of educational games, because it motivates the player to learn from the game (Fjællingsdal and Klöckner, 2017). A pleasurable gameplay experience is related with positive learning outcomes and motivates to learning from it (Bisson and Luckner, 1996; Fjællingsdal and Klöckner, 2017). Another important element is the degree of perceived behavioural control; a behaviour perceived as easy will be adopted with higher probability (Ajzen, 2002), and role-play creates a safe space for participants to openly engage with others’ viewpoints (Rumore et al., 2016). A game that helps to understand issues and proposes clear, manageable behaviours to change them will likely keep learners’ motivation high. This is especially important in role-play games aimed at learning socio-environmental issues that are naturally complex (Fjællingsdal and Klöckner, 2017).However, the mere exposure of the audience to a simulated situation is insufficient for a strong behavioural change. Motivation and opportunities to think about a cause will make the change of attitude durable, since judgments based on thinking persist more over time (Briñol and Petty, 2015). Referring specifically to game play, Ke (2016) identified meta-reflective moments as one of the five key themes necessary for purposeful learning through playing. In this sense, Foster et al. (2019) successfully achieved pro-environmental changes in learners’ identity through a virtual game where high school students role-played to be environmentalists, using projective reflection methodology. Allowing a time to think, reflect about the message received and discuss it will reinforce the persuasion about the social and environmental benefits of recycling electronic devices.On the other hand, for efficient behavioural engagement two-way is better than one-way communication. The audience is easily engaged when it is directly involved in the persuasion process, like in classes, seminars or meetings (Djordjevic and Cotton, 2011). In contrast, one-way communications like newspapers, blogs, flyers or research articles may lead to misunderstanding of the message (e.g. Cornell and Randall, 2011). For these reasons, in this study we opted for face-to-face intervention with a time for thinking.
1.5. Objectives and expectationsIn this study we aimed at developing an intervention in educational settings to change behaviour in two imperatives of 10RO framework, Refusing (to buy) and Recycling mobile phones, through the exposure to current practices employed to obtain cobalt. The intervention was assayed in groups of students of different disciplines and academic levels. Depending on the discipline, students may be differentially aware and motivated about sustainability. Students from humanistic disciplines and educational sciences would give more support to sustainable actions than engineering students, (Kukkonen et al., 2018). Students from some business courses are not concerned about sustainability (e.g. Palma et al., 2011), and seem to have limited awareness about environmental issues (Cezarino et al., 2018). Regarding academic levels –generally of different age-, younger undergraduate students tend to be less concerned about sustainability than older graduate students. Examples are Greek undergraduate students unconcerned about sustainable food behaviour (Kamenidou et al., 2019), or Italian young undergraduate students being grouped as unconcerned about environmental values and protection of natural spaces (Forleo et al., 2019).The vulnerability of children rights in DRC mines was the base of the intervention, called “For a Good Selfie” (FOGS thereafter). Expectedly, the conscious knowledge of the implications of cobalt mining coupled with empathy for miner children should promote behaviours favourable to R-imperatives regarding mobile phones. Here we have tested this intervention in 271 students of secondary education and 266 of higher education from Asturias, a region of Spain, where the WEEE returning rate is quite low in comparison with other European countries (Bovea et al., 2018). The behavioural intention “Refusing to buy”, and the behaviour “Recycling” (mobile phones), were measured. Similar interventions based on role-play and no-role play (“Imagine-other”), were assayed in student groups of similar age and discipline, and role-play interventions tested in different age and formation background. Differences between role-play and no-role play, and the effects of student age and formation background were determined.
1.6. Departure hypothesesa)Playing FOGS, which is based on empathy induced through perspective-taking (Batson, 2002, 2009) will increase sustainable behaviour (Recycling and Refusing-to-buy) in treated groups (Font et al., 2016), in comparison with non-treated students.b)From the efficiency of easily understandable, pleasurable role-play to rise awareness about socio-environmental issues (Rumore et al., 2016; Fjællingsdal and Klöckner, 2017; Lithoxoidou et al., 2017), role-playing with FOGS will improve sustainable behaviours in comparison with a similar intervention based solely on perspective taking without role-play.c)From different awareness about sustainability in different disciplines (e.g. Cezarino et al., 2018; Kukkonen et al., 2018), the efficiency of FOGS to improve sustainable behaviours will be higher in students of educational science and humanistic disciplines than in engineering students.d)Following Forleo et al. (2019) and Kamenidou et al. (2019), younger students are less sensitive to sustainability values. Pre-university students will thus be less sensitive to FOGS than older graduate students, changing less their behaviour –or intention of behaviour- towards sustainability.
