Drowsiness in humans is an inattentive state that happens during transitions from awake to sleep in a short period of time. Poor rest habits, remedial situations like irregular levels of sugar, sleep apnea, narcolepsy, and some medicine reactions are the reasons for drowsiness (Parekh et al., 2020, Sikander and Anwar, 2018). Whatever may be the cause for a person to be drowsy, the result impacts his own life by reducing his work capability. Likewise, it also puts others life in threat while they involved in activities like vehicle driving, crane operating, mining blasting, etc. Therefore, it is an essential to determine the drowsiness and enhance the human working skill. To achieve this, there are several drowsy detection (DD) methods are available, such as subjective-based (Miley et al., 2016), vehicle-based (Vinckenbosch et al., 2020), behavior-based (Ramzan et al., 2019), and physiological-based (Hu and Lodewijks, 2020). Due to the ease of extracting information from the human body during drowsiness, the physiological parameters based method has proven to be more efficient than other methods for detecting drowsiness (Wang et al., 2020, Halim and Rehan, 2020).
The signals produced in the brain are more correlated to the physiological signs of human (Wei et al., 2020, Anuragi and Sisodia, 2020), and are reliable to determine the onset of drowsiness. Among all cerebrum methods such as EEG (Electroencephalography), PET (Positron Emission Tomography), MEG (Magneto-encephalography), or fMRI (Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging), EEG is the most flexible and commonly used in sleep related research (Diykh et al., 2020, Kamran et al., 2019).
Detection of drowsiness using EEG can be done by multiple electrodes EEG system or single electrode EEG system. Due to the high data production, multi-channel EEG system experiments in Li and Chung (2015) and Yeo et al. (2009) give better accuracy such as 96% and 99.3% respectively for DD. However, these can be complicated and cumbersome because they require extensive wiring (Lin et al., 2010, Rohit et al., 2017, Anitha, 2019), as well as proper connection to the scalp is an issue.
The single-channel EEG system has only a slight handle on the head and is suitable for real-time use, but the accuracy is likely to be reduced. To reduce this accuracy loss, some researchers have explored and researched the single-channel EEG system using multiple signal processing methods. In Belakhdar et al. (2018), Lin et al. (2010), Rohit et al. (2017), and Anitha (2019), the authors have used Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) (Cooley and Tukey, 1965) method to analyze and featurize the EEG and achieved 82%, 74%, 87% and 88% accuracy respectively. Jalilifard and Pizzolato (2016) have used the Short-term Fourier Transform (STFT) (Allen, 1977) method to reveals features related to time-frequency and have acquired 91% accuracy. Similarly, the authors in Correa et al. (2014) have used Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) (Percival and Walden, 2000) analysis based features and some other features to assess a person's drowsiness with accuracy of 87%. In da Silveira et al. (2016), the authors explored the Wavelet Packet Transform (WPT) (Percival and Walden, 2000) method for capturing features and showing that their features were better than those collected using other signal processing methods. These approaches are promising from the perspective of using single-channel EEG data and signal processing methods for drowsiness detection. However, these results are orthogonal to the research carried out in this paper. In this paper, a combination of signal processing, neuroscience and computer science knowledge was used to detect drowsiness with better accuracy. Due to WPT's dual scaling and ability to obtain the required frequency range signals (da Silveira et al., 2016, Percival and Walden, 2000), this paper detects the drowsiness with the feature selection method and machine learning framework using WPT analysis-based features. Following are the contributions and highlights of the current work:
•EEG sub-bands like Delta, Theta, Alpha, Beta, and Gamma are extracted in time-domain using the WPT signal processing method, where the best wavelet function is used and appropriate decomposition levels.•A method has been proposed to select the potential features for the detection of onset of drowsiness.•Performance of multiple classifiers have been compared in detecting the onset of drowsiness and the result is validated with the subject wise, cross subject wise, and combine subject wise data set.•A detailed qualitative and quantitative analysis for the performance of classifiers is carried out using standard EEG sleep dataset and virtually simulated driving driver dataset.
