With the rapid development of cloud computing, big data and the 5G mobile network, smart IoT devices such as mobile phones, wearable devices, laptops and vehicular units are increasingly popular. Nevertheless, these devices are usually equipped with limited computing and storage capacity [1], [2], [3]. However, resource-hungry and computation-intensive tasks can beoffloaded to the cloud [4], [5] to leverage its powerful and configurable capacity [6]. Meanwhile, the paradigm of Everything as a Service (EaaS) [7], [8], including cloud services, micro-services, edge services and IoT services etc., has enabled the constant emergence of a large number of services with the same or similar functions [9]. Although EaaS provides users with a large number of choices, it also introduces the challenge of placing a heavy burden on decision-making. Fortunately, QoS-based service recommendation provides a way to solve this problem, and accurate QoS prediction is the premise of this approach. At present, many approaches have been devoted to improving the accuracy, among which Collaborative Filtering (CF) is widely used and effective.
In the traditional cloud computing paradigm, services are deployed on the remote cloud. Therefore, it is an energy-consuming and bandwidth-expending task for users to send data and service requirements to the remote cloud. In addition, if a large number of users access the cloud, it will lead to bottleneck problems, thereby reducing the quality of service and causing more serious network delays. Consequently, solely relying on cloud computing is not sufficient to support the development of IoT services and applications (including intelligent transportation, intelligent cities, location-based services, mobile payment, etc.) that have higher QoS requirements [10], [11]. In recent years, edge computing [12], [13], [14] has emerged as a key technology for the 5G network, that allows service providers to deploy services on edge servers geographically close to users to provide real-time, dynamic and intelligent services to end users [15]. Nonetheless, incompatibilities exist when directly applying QoS prediction approaches from traditional cloud computing to the edge computing paradigm, and are mainly reflected in the following two aspects:

(1)User mobility. Users with various mobile devices in the edge environment may be in the coverage of different edge servers when they are moving. Due to the different network environments, performance and loads of edge servers, the QoS of the same service invoked by the same user from different edge servers will also differ. Unfortunately, in the traditional cloud computing paradigm, the QoS prediction method does not consider the influence of the edge server dimension and instead considers the user dimension and service dimension.(2)Data privacy. Edge data including QoS values involve personal privacy and need to be preserved. For this reason, some CF-based privacy-preserving QoS prediction methods have been proposed. However, most of these methods are conducted on the basis that data are uploaded to the cloud for centralized privacy preservation, thereby increasing the risk of disclosing users’ privacy. Therefore, it is urgent to cope with this challenge in a distributed manner.
In this paper, we propose the DEQP2 model for the ECNs. In this model, a user invokes edge services by accessing the nearest edge server, and the corresponding QoS records are protected by the edge server. Then, the cloud center performs QoS prediction based on CF. The DEQP2 model makes full use of the distributed nature of the edge computing paradigm to deploy the privacy-preserving process to the edge servers. In addition, based on the improvement of the user-based CF according to the characteristics of QoS data in the edge environment, we propose the DEDP algorithm through a comprehensive consideration of user preferences and edge environmental differences. The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

(1)We propose a distributed edge service QoS predictionmodel with privacy preservation. QoS records of users in different areas are collected by edge servers, and then the Laplace mechanism is used to provide users with a measurable degree of differential privacy preservation before release.(2)We propose the DEDP algorithm to take the impact of user preferences and mobility into consideration. For each user, we perform QoS prediction with his or her similar QoS records on different edge servers and his or her similar users under the current edge server. Through theoretical analysis, the whole process of the algorithm is verified to satisfy ε-Differential Privacy.(3)We experiment with an edge service QoS dataset by integrating two real-world datasets from the WSDream and Telecom datasets. The experimental results show that the proposed algorithm not only ensures privacy but also improves accuracy compared with some widely used prediction approaches.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The related work is reviewed in Section 2. Section 3 introduces the concept and properties of Differential Privacy (DP). A motivation example is given, and the proposed DEQP2 model is formulated in Section 4. The implementation process of the proposed DEDP algorithm is explained in detail in Section 5. The performance of the proposed model and algorithm is evaluated experimentally and analyzed in Section 6, and finally, the conclusion and future work are summarized in Section 7.
