With the adoption of industry 4.0, the role of the industrial internet of things (IIoT) has been widened significantly. Potentially the technology has been used with a great promise in smart industries to collect, update, and share status messages, which subsequently contributes to industrial data analysis and performance management [1]. Recently, large scale industrial automation is making strides by the inclusion of autonomous mobile systems. Unlike traditional on-site robots, these fast-pacing connected systems facilitate data forwarding across large spans of industrial environments with innovative applications like autonomous vehicles, machine utilization, power management, quality control, and smart logistics. The goal is to improve the production efficiency and real-time monitoring of the industrial environment [2].
In general, IoT devices are deployed to support data gathering and real-time information sharing [3]. They facilitate information coverage and provide stable connectivity to the control station. That is, the intermediate devices act as relay nodes conjointly sharing information and status messages. Furthermore, they work collaboratively to establish single or multiple real-time connections to the control station depending on the large-scale deployment of IoT devices [4]. This is made possible by establishing a well-defined communication infrastructure. However, in large-scale industrial scenarios, it becomes unfeasible to deploy devices ensuring around the clock connectivity. Notably, along with intermittent connectivity due to the sparsity and mobility of autonomous mobile systems, there is limited or no communication path redundancy in such disconnected networks. Consequently, this hinders the timely dissemination of time-critical messages. Even though there are solutions to provide redundancy but requires widespread deployment and maintenance of a communication network, necessarily deeming the solution cost ineffective [5].
As highlighted earlier, data generated by IoT devices is a key asset, and sharing it on time becomes quintessential. With many data forwarding approaches specifically designed for in such a dynamic environment proposed in the literature to make data forwarding possible. For instance, vehicles along with static devices are deployed to support the dissemination of critical information on roads [6]. Here, a large number of such devices are required to support emergency message dissemination, which makes such fixed installations uneconomical [7]. Moreover, sparse vehicle density affects its network coverage. Similar to connected vehicles on road networks, modern industrial environments are often engineered comprising smooth surfaces, both indoors and outdoors, using some form of wheeled locomotion. Thus, there is a possibility of using ad hoc networks and connected smart devices to carry information. Therefore, in the work, we propose a data dissemination mechanism using autonomous mobile systems that are already contributing to the industrial automation process. The systems are used to establish a data forwarding network from a source node to the control center. The mechanism is evaluated with varying vehicular densities to analyze its benefits in the smart industry and to provide a sustainable communication network.
Problem Statement – Generally, static network devices are placed to provide maximum coverage in any traditional industrial environment. However, such deployment is expensive and requires regular maintenance. Moreover, with the ever-changing road network in a congested industrial site, a large number of such nodes are required for on-site monitoring of autonomous devices, increasing the total operational cost. Furthermore, autonomous devices demand continuous monitoring to avoid unpredictable scenarios, unfortunately, the static network only provides a single communication link from the source to the control unit. Recently, IoT devices have been used to establish a communication network after natural disasters or during exploratory missions. Here, the connected devices act as message relays from the source to the control center. Similar to this concept, we propose a data dissemination framework that relies on autonomous vehicles. The vehicles act as data sources and relay nodes directing the network traffic towards the control center.
Notably, in such industrial environments, vehicle movements are irregular along unspecified paths. Moreover, it is common to have only intermittent paths from the source to the destination. Traditionally, techniques like flooding provide maximum coverage but with enormous message complexity they lead up to network congestion affecting the overall system performance. Furthermore, the environment when connected is classed as an opportunistic network with intermittent connections between the source and destination. Often mobility of the nodes is used to their advantage by carrying forward the data and passing it along when opportunistic contacts are formed. In this paper, we propose an opportunistic path-aware data dissemination scheme between the dynamic source and destination in an industrial environment where single-path strategy is adopted to establish opportunistic contacts for single-hop data forwarding. The main contributions of the work are as follows:
•Propose a data forwarding scheme for multiple sources to destination in an industrial environment, with intermediate nodes holding the data packets for a certain time ensuring successful delivery to next-hop by repeated retransmissions. Since IoT devices are equipped with limited capacity, a time-bound buffer management policy is adopted to maximize successful delivery.•Design a single-path data forwarding decision model, a device deviating from the selected path to the destination either offloads the message to another suitable device on the path to the destination or else discards the message with no further transmissions to reduce network congestion.•Evaluate the proposed approach in terms of packet delivery ratio, end-to-end delay, hop count and network overhead. The proposed data forwarding scheme is compared to classical flooding, random selection, and greedy geocast schemes.
Organization – The paper is organized as follows, Section 2 covers the literature review. The system model is presented in Section 3. Section 4 presents the proposed framework followed by details of forwarding approaches used in Section 5. The performance evaluation is presented in Section 6. We conclude the work in Section 7.
