Due to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), the world is undergoing a situation unprecedented in recent human history, with massive economic losses and a global health crisis. The virus initially identified in December 2019 in the city of Wuhan, China has rapidly spread throughout the world, resulting in the ongoing pandemic. Since the initial outbreak, the disease has affected over two hundred countries and territories across the globe, with more than 20 million cases reported (COVID-19, 2020). The outbreak was declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) by the World Health Organization (WHO) (WHO, 2020) on January 30, 2020. The virus is very contagious and is primarily transmitted between people through close contact. A variety of common symptoms are found in those infected, such as cough, fever, shortness of breath, fatigue, loss of smell, and pneumonia. The complications of the disease include pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and other infections. Precise and timely diagnosis is being hampered due to the lack of treatment, scarcity of resources, and harsh conditions of the laboratory environment. This has increased the challenge to curb the spread of the virus.
Furthermore, the absence of an approved therapy to cure COVID-19 infections has motivated the pressing need for prevention and mitigation solutions to reduce the spread of the virus. Social distancing protocols, including country-wide lockdowns, travel bans, and limiting access to essential businesses, are gradually curbing the spread. In fact, social distancing has already proven to be an effective non-pharmaceutical measure for stopping the transmission of this infectious disease (Ferguson et al., 2006). Social distancing refers to an approach to minimizing disease spread by maintaining a safe physical distance between people, avoiding crowds, and reducing physical contact. According to WHO norms (Hensley, 2020), proper social distancing requires people to maintain a distance of at least 6 ft from other individuals. Because it is highly likely that an infected individual may transmit the virus to a healthy person, social distancing can significantly reduce the number of fatalities caused by the virus, as well as reduce economic loss. Fig. 1 illustrates the impact of social distancing on the daily number of cases (Irfan, 2020). It can be observed from Fig. 1 (a) that social distancing can significantly reduce the peak number of cases of infection, and essentially delay the occurrence of the peak if it is implemented at an early stage of the pandemic. This would reduce the burden on health care facilities and allow more time for adopting countermeasures. Also, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), social distancing can reduce the total number of cases, and the sooner the measure is taken, the higher the positive impact will be.Download : Download high-res image (300KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Impact of social distancing on COVID-19 outbreak [20].
Lately, several countries throughout the world including the Netherlands (Amsterdam, 2020), USA (Smart America, 2020), and South Korea (Silva, Khan, & Han, 2018) are taking the initiative to deploy “sustainable smart cities” (Bibri & Krogstie, 2017). For example, the latest Smart City 3.0 (Amsterdam, 2020) initiative by the City of Amsterdam encourages the effective participation of citizens, government, and private organizations in building smart city solutions. The plan includes the development of infrastructures and technologies in the areas of smart energy and water systems, the Intelligent Transport System (ITS), and so on. However, as part of the effective preparation for the current and future pandemics, it is expected that the sustainable development of smart cities will provide situational intelligence and an automated targeted response to ensure the safety of global public health and to minimize massive economic losses. In this context, smart cities will host data-driven services along with other IoT devices, such as IP surveillance and thermal cameras, sensors, and actuators, to deliver community-wide social distancing estimates and the early detection of potential pandemics. Fig. 2 illustrates a sustainable smart city scenario where social distancing is monitored in real time to offer a variety of services, such as detecting and monitoring the distance between any two individuals, detecting crowds and gatherings in public areas, monitoring physical contacts between people such as handshaking and hugging, detecting and monitoring individuals with disease symptoms such as cough and high body temperature, and monitoring any violation of quarantine by infected people. In this paper, we propose a data-driven deep learning framework for the development of a sustainable smart city, offering a timely response to combat the COVID-19 pandemic through mass video surveillance. Upon the detection of a violation, an audio-visual, non-intrusive alert is generated to warn the crowd without revealing the identities of the individuals who have violated the social distancing measure. In particular, we make the following contributions: (a) A deep learning-based framework is presented for monitoring social distancing in the context of sustainable smart cities in an effort to curb the spread of COVID-19 or similar infectious diseases; (b) The proposed system leverages state-of-the-art, deep learning-based real-time object detection models for the detection of people in videos, captured with a monocular camera, to implement social distancing monitoring use cases; (c) A perspective transformation is presented, where the captured video is transformed from a perspective view to a bird’s eye (top-down) view to identify the region of interest (ROI) in which social distancing will be monitored; (d) A detailed performance evaluation is provided to show the effectiveness of the proposed system on a video surveillance dataset.Download : Download high-res image (514KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Real-time monitoring of social distancing in a sustainable smart city scenario.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The background and related work is presented in Section 2. Sections 3 and 4 present the proposed system, dataset, and experiments with the performance results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper with suggestions for future work.
