Blood morphology can be used to determine the status of human health (normal or abnormal). The blood cells include white blood cells (WBCs), red blood cells (RBCs) and Platelets. The WBCs are responsible for fighting against some defects in human body. The RBCs carry oxygen and energy nutrients to each part of the body, while the platelets are bleeding control agents during wounds or other infections in the body (Jandl, 1996).
The focus of this work is to automatically investigate the appearance of RBCs and its important content called, i.e., hemoglobin appearing as central pallor. RBC is the chromatic part of the whole blood giving red color to it. The mature red cell is small, sizing ranging from 7 to 8 μm; it is round and biconcave in shape. A normal RBC consists of 1/3 portion hemoglobin of its whole volume, seeing Fig. 1, which is responsible for two vigorous and foremost transport functions, i.e., transport of oxygen to peripheral tissues and transport of CO2 from peripheral tissues to lungs (Kannan et al., 2017).Download : Download high-res image (333KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Sample images of (a) microcytic RBC, (b) macrocytic RBC, (c) normocytic RBC.
The current state-of-the-art techniques for the analysis of blood cells are automatic analyzer machines and flow cytometry, which work on laser or impedance-base method (Grover et al., 2011).
The main issues in the above-mentioned machines are that of expensive cost and difficult operation. Moreover, the in-depth and detailed analysis results cannot be produced by these machines like identifying the specific abnormal class of Red Blood Cells (spur cell, burr cell, dacrocyte and schistocyte) without monitoring and visualizing by expert pathologists. Therefore, an automatic image processing-based approach is an alternate solution for the segmentation and identification of blood cells. The main triumphs of a typical system should be the accurate detection of the following.
Poikilocytosis is RBCs shape variations due to some disorder in the blood, the prominent varieties of RBCs found in the blood stream are shown in Table 1. In the table, column (a) through (f) shows poikilocytes. These cells can be segmented by calculating the simple geometric features such as convexity, ellipticity, extent, rectangularity, circularity and solidity. Schistocytes is another class of RBCs variations. It is a condition with fragments of cells found in blood smear; the fragments are destructed parts of RBCs during some chronic diseases. These fragments can be detected through measurement of global shape descriptors such as extent, triangularity and eccentricity.
The objective of this paper is an automatic identification of abnormal blood smear slides with microcytic hypochromic cells. In the proposed method, we have first created important datasets of related images. The datasets were created by selecting the slides portraying the existence of some concern cells affected due to anemic diseases such as microcytic hypochromic anemia. The images in the dataset were evaluated manually by expert hematologists in a hospital to determine the ground truth. Then the images were analyzed with the proposed segmentation scheme using the ground truth.
The rest of paper is organized as follow: Section 2 describes the related work in the area while Section 3 gives a general description of our proposed method. Results and discussion are presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
