With the advancement in nuclear technology and safety standards, the storage and handling of useful radioactive materials at radiological establishments have become an important issue. For protecting the environment from hazardous ionizing radiations emitting spontaneously from the radioactive materials, a gamma-ray shielding enclosure (GSE) needs to design with suitable materials. Shielding is one of the best protection methods to minimize undesirable damage to the living tissues caused by ionizing radiation (Clarke and Dunster, 1991). For the selection of an appropriate material for making the GSE, shield-designers have to investigate materials' suitability by using its gamma-ray shielding parameters (GSP). Two types of shield designs are popular viz. composite-shield and multi-layered shield. The composite-shield, i.e., a single-layered shield made from a composite material, possess serious drawback of unnoticed radiation leakage from the pinholes (Kim et al., 2015), whereas the pinhole-leakage problem has been resolved in the multi-layered shields (Kim et al., 2015; Park et al., 2018). The design of a multi-layered shielding enclosure (MLSE) comprises two or more layers of dissimilar materials. In the year 1943, the first MLSE made from concrete and paraffinized wood had used to shield the nuclear-reactor established in Chicago (Hossain et al., 2010). History of various developments in radiation shielding technology has been reviewed thoroughly by Shultis and Faw (Shultis and Faw, 2005). After that, Sazali et al. have provided another enlightening review regarding the development trends in MLSEs and their shielding efficacy with BUFs (Arif Sazali et al., 2019).
Shield-designers have to perform lots of calculations for many GSP before suggesting suitable materials for effective GSE. Mass attenuation coefficient (MAC) and buildup factor (BUF) are the critical GSP. XCOM, a photon cross sections database, has been calculated MACs (Berger and Hubbell, 1987). The latest version of XCOM is available with updated values of the cross-sections up to four significant figures for almost all the periodic table elements (Berger et al., 2010). White has introduced the concept of BUF (White, 1950). Kalos (1956), for the first time, proposed an empirical formula for synthesizing double-layered buildup factor (DLBUF) from BUFs of single-layered slabs and plane-normal sources. Bowman and Trubey (Bowman and Trubey, 1958) have established a new empirical formula for an approximation of the DLBUFs for stratified lead-water GSE at different angles and layers' thicknesses. Broder et al. have introduced a general formula for computing multi-layered buildup factor (MLBUF) for gamma-rays transmitted through heterogeneous media (Broder et al., 1962). Burke and Beck have measured MLBUFs for a point isotropic source (Cs-137) placed in MLSEs with many layers (n), such that n ≤ 4 (Burke and Beck, 1974). They further suggested a modification in the correction factors' in the Kalos' formula. The modified Kalos' formula has been renamed as Burke and Beck formula.
Guvendik (Bakos, 1994, Bakos, 1995) compared DLBUFs at 1.43 and 2.75 MeV and improved the calculation accuracy. Further, Lin and Jiang (1996) have introduced a dedicated empirical formula for MLBUFs for a point isotropic source in stratified shields. After that, Hirayama and Shin (1998) introduced an approximating model, Guvendik and Tsoulfanidis (2000) suggested formulae for DLBUF. Shultis and Faw (2005) have introduced an adjustment factor for BUF of finite media. The external dependency of DLBUFs on the atomic number (Z) and photon-energy (E) highlighted by (Al-arif and Kakil, 2015). Mann et al., 2016a, Mann et al., 2016b, Mann et al., 2016c have established that fixed E and OT of a DLSE in the orientation low-Z, followed by high-Z material (LZFHZ), offer lower BUF values as compared to a single material shield of the same OT. Mann (2019) has been verified that for fixed photon energy and OT, the DLSE provides better shielding protection than either material's single-layered shield.
The ANS-standard (ANSI/ANS-6.4.3-1991) has been categorized the BUFs as exposure (EBF) and absorption (EABF) depending on the detectors' response function for air and absorber, respectively. A review of the literature shows that many fitting formulae have been developed for calculation of BUFs, such as Taylor, 1954, Berger, 1956, Capo, 1959, GP (Geometrical Progression) (Harima and Nishiwaki, 1972). For the calculation of BUFs, Harima et al., (1986) have established the higher accuracy of the GP fitting (GPF) formula than the other three fitting formulae. For the energy range 0.015–15 MeV, the GPF-formula applies for an infinite homogeneous medium (IHM) with a source to detector distance, i.e., optical-thickness (OT) range 0.5–40 mfp. For calculation of BUFs at deep penetrations, i.e., OT > 40 mfp, an extrapolation method has introduced for the deep penetrations (Harima et al., 1986). Finally, in 1991 the American Nuclear Society (ANS) published the ANS-standard for calculations of BUFs for IHM with GPF-formula (ANSI/ANS-6.4.3-1991). The ANS-standard also includes some correction factors required for finite shields of high-Z materials (Gopinath et al., 1987) and the neglected coherent scattering (Subbaiah et al., 1989). For the calculation of BUFs, Shimizu et al. have concluded the excellent agreement between the three methods viz. Invariant Embedding (IE), GPF, and Monte Carlo simulations (Shimizu et al., 2004). Yoshida has re-established that the GPF is the most accurate fitting method for calculating BUFs (Yoshida, 2006).
In 2001, society withdrew the ANS-standard. However, the work is in progress for reaffirming the widely used ANS-standard. The reason behind the withdrawing of the ANS-standard is the failure of its working group to update the standards' after passing a decade (Durani, 2009). Sanders suggested that the ANS-standard should be-revisited to include updated cross-sections data, including the new codes that make it more useful (Sanders, 2010). The ANS-standard has been compiled with the most accurate databases of photon cross-sections and other photon interaction parameters available till 1991. The MAC-database has attained refinement as compared to BUFs-database.
A plethora of research has been published in the field of radiological protection and dosimetry. It has shown the advancement of knowledge in this expanding field. Review of the literature using the Science-Direct suggested that in the last 25 years, 81,937 research articles and 10,053 book chapters have been published on radiation shielding. It has been noticed that most published articles focused on measuring and calculating MACs, effective atomic numbers (Zeff), and BUFs. Whereas only a few articles have been published on MLBUFs. Besides, the higher shielding efficacy of MLSEs, the complexity involved in its investigations seems to be the lower number of the published articles on MLBUFs. Some experts have elaborated on the above fact by stating that no clear-cut procedure exists to investigate MLSEs (Subbaiah and Sarangapani, 2006, Subbaiah and Sarangapani, 2008). Arif Sazali et al. (2019) have highlighted the research scope in MLSEs and concluded that multi-layered shielding comprises enormous scope and perspectives for developing lightweight and cost-effective GSEs.
The computer plays a vital role in the calculation of various GSP required by the shield-designers. Computer science and engineering have achieved extensive development in the last decade, 2010–2020. Thus, numerous codes have been developed for calculation of the GSP during the decade. Starting from the XCOM, many codes have been developed for an individual shielding parameter. XMuDat program has been developed by Nowotny (1998) for calculation of MAC, mass-energy absorption coefficient (MenAC), effective atomic number (Zeff), effective electron number per gram (Neff) with two databases (Boone and Chavez, 1996, Hubbell and Seltzer, 1995). Shultis and Faw have developed SHLDUTIL: a code for useful shielding data (Shultis and Faw, 2000a, Shultis and Faw, 2000b). Bologna University developed the MuPlot-program (Fernandez et al., 2004) based on the X-ray cross-sections database used for medical diagnostics (McMaster et al., 1969). Gerward et al., have re-engineered the XCOM to GUI based software, WinXCom (Gerward et al., 2004, Gerward et al., 2001). Okunade (2007) has developed a computer program for the calculation of MenAC of living tissues for X-rays. After that, the researchers have been understood the utility of computer-programs in the shielding investigations. Thus, researchers have been paid extra attention to develop users' friendly software-tools for calculation of GSP. Taylor et al. (2012) have announced the Auto-Zeff for robust calculation of effective atomic numbers in the energy range 10 keV-10 GeV from the elemental composition of shielding-material. Un and Caner (2014) have published Direct-Zeff software capable of calculating Zeff and Neff for total and partial photon interactions on the broader energy range, 1 keV-100 GeV. The Rad Toolbox, a software designed with the capability to calculate a variety of GSP (Hertel et al., 2015). Our research group has provided a series of computer-programs for calculation of various Gamma-Ray Interaction Coefficients (GRIC) such as GRIC-Toolkits; MAC, MenAC, Equivalent atomic number (Zeq), and KERMA in the energy range (0.01–20 MeV), GRIC2-Toolkit; Zeff, Neff, effective atomic weight (Aeff), atomic cross-section (σa), Half-Value Layer thickness (HVL), and Klein–Nishina cross-section, eσKN in the energy 0.015–15 MeV, GRIC3-toolkit; the scatter acceptance angle, θSC, Scattered-to-transmission ratios, and Zeff-toolkit (Mann et al., 2016a, Mann et al., 2015c, Mann et al., 2016b, Mann and Mann, 2018). Similar computer-programs, ParShield, and WinNC-toolkit, have been designed to calculate fast-neutrons' macroscopic effective removal cross-sections (Elmahroug et al., 2015, Mann et al., 2015a, Olukotun et al., 2019). In 2016 and 2019, our research group has also developed computer-codes to calculate BUFs in the energy range 0.5–3.0 MeV (Mann et al., 2016a, Mann, 2019). After that, the BXCOM software has been developed to calculate some GSP; Zeff, Neff, Zeq, EBFs, EABFs, and related GPF-parameters for the shielding-material in the energy range 0.015–15 MeV (Eyecioğlu et al., 2019). Olarinoye et al. (2019) have established, EXABCal code to calculate both EBFs and EABFs. The toolkits GEANT4, MCNPX, EGS5 have been used to estimate the shielding parameters of various building materials by many researchers (Sayyed, 2016, Obaid et al., 2018, Sayyed et al., 2018a, Sayyed et al., 2018b, Olukotun et al., 2020). Recently, Sakar et al. have presented an online-software, Phy-x/PSD, for calculation of 18 GSP in the respective range of energy (Şakar et al., 2020). However, the Phy-x/PSD-software has neglected the calculations of 12 GSP for the composite-shields, 6 GSP for multi-layered shields, and some correction factors required by the shield-designers.
There is a dire need to converge all the developed computer programs in one place for users' ease of access to already-developed computer applications. Thus, motivated by the NIST approach to converge all computer-programs for calculation of MACs by providing an online platform, XCOM. The present work has been performed to converge all computational methods for GSP of GSEs by providing a user- friendly online platform, Py-MLBUF. The present work has aimed to develop a user-friendly online platform, Py-MLBUF, for calculating all the 36 GSP for both types of shields in the full energy range, 0.015–15 MeV. The quick and precise calculation of all the GSP makes the Py-MLBUF superior to the existing computer-programs. The newly developed platform offers free online research consultancy that helps in stimulating the neglected research work to design cost-effective, lightweight, and practical MLSEs.
