Cognitive radio (CR) technology has attracted a great deal attention given its ability to perceive available spectrum resources directly from an operational electromagnetic environment. The technology has itself led to a growth in interest of detection and classification tasks in the field of wireless communication [1], [2]. Weak signal detection is a more challenging task where the noise overwhelms the signal, making any type of analysis difficult. It becomes more complex to extract accurate information from the input signal, leading to three primary challenges. First, the raw data must be processed by customized filters for signal denoising [3]. Second, numerous candidate signal durations must be considered. Third, these candidates only provide rough intervals that need be further refined to identify precise bounds. And it is common to make compromise among speed, accuracy and simplicity for solutions to these problems.
Conventional CR technology relies heavily on hand-crafted filters to obtain radio operating parameters from a signal. For instance, employing an energy detector and an associated threshold is a popular way of signal sensing with low computational and implementation complexities [4]. However, this approach is limited by the capacity of the filtering or thresholding signals, which results in disability to differentiate interference from signals and noise, and poor performance in low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) applications. Waveform-based sensing outperforms energy detector in terms of reliability and convergence speed, but is only applicable to known signal patterns [5]. Cyclostationarity algorithms can differentiate noise from signals, at the expense of increased complexity and bandwidth loss [6]. Matched-filtering is considered to be optimal for detection under the condition that the transmitted signal is known [7]. Existing filtering methods require prior knowledge such as the bandwidth, operating frequency and modulation mode, thus they are often impractical for the weak signal detection in strong and complex background noise with unknown covariance. This is fundamentally attributed to the way the filtering based detection mechanisms work.
Therefore, it is highly desirable to construct a new framework that is not constrained by these issues. An approach which can compromise the advantage of conventional filtering in a new way to characterize the fundamental difference between signals and noise will be significantly valuable.
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in computer vision, voice recognition and natural language processing [8], [9], [10]. Advanced neural network architectures such as Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [11] and long short-term memory (LSTM) [12] significantly improve the performance of feature learning directly on the raw data. More accurate high degrees of freedom (DOF) models based on an end-to-end feature learning have surpassed hand-crafted implementations. This is made possible by the use of a combination of strong regularization techniques and greatly improved methods for stochastic gradient descent (SGD). A deep learning based model is recently proposed to leverage a CNN based classifier for signal detection [13]. Along with a probabilistic-based output layer, the sparse auto-encoder based on DNNs has been introduced for signal processing [14]. Unfortunately, the learning of convolution filters has been purely data-driven which ignores the advantages of previous approaches for feature enhancement. And we will demonstrate how a combination of hand-created and learning filters benefits weak signal detection.
To improve the capacity of DNNs, we introduce a modulation filter into CNNs to enhance the learned filters [15]. A simple modulation process is designed, which can be replicable at each layer. Furthermore, an attention mechanism and a classifier predict the signal duration and modulation mode in a time series, indicated as learning modulation filter network (LMFN) shown in Fig. 1. LMFNs are constructed based on the learned convolutional filters, the attention mechanism and the signal classifier. Modulation filters refine signal filters for unknown background noise, which can be shared at each layer to compress the model in a relatively small size. All of the modulation filters, attention durations and signal modes are jointly optimized and obtained in an end-to-end manner, leading to a compact and portable deep learning architecture. We show that LMFNs achieve state-of-the-art performance compared to CR schemes.Download : Download high-res image (683KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Pipeline of the learning modulation filter networks (LMFNs). In stage 1, LMFNs detect the signal duration (green waveform) in noise (red waveform) by the convolution and attention layers. The modulation mode of the signal segment is classified by the rest layers in stage 2. The red line shows the training stage interval.
Thanks to the modulation and attention mechanisms, our architecture is more suitable for weak signal detection in strong and complex background noise with unknown covariance. On the top of the convolutional feature maps, attention layers are attached for a multi-scale proposal and bound regression. The classifier which combines CNN and LSTM is used for automatic modulation classification based on salient durations. Our LMFNs are highly compressed, yet achieve state-of-the-art performance compared with CNNs model.
Although various algorithms have been employed to detect communication signals, there is currently no representative data sets in the field of communication. To address this issue, we have also developed weak signal dataset that contains unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) communication signals in a real-terrain environment. The contributions of our work include:
(1)New modulation filters that are employed to refine signal filters, leading to a new architecture for CNNs model. The convolution operation is further improved by the learned filters. LMFNs are highly compressed, yet achieving state-of-the-art performance.(2)Solving LMFNs in an end-to-end framework with a two-stage optimization scheme. These LMFNs outperform all the state-of-the-art models, and can solve the weak signal detection problem under strong and complex background noise with unknown covariance.(3)Establishing a weak signal dataset that contains UAV communication signals in a real-terrain environment. The dataset is rich in attributes and useful for training networks like LMFNs.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a brief overview of signal detection algorithms. The LMFNs are described in Section 3 and the simulations we performed and the accompanying results are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 concludes the paper.
