Learning from imbalanced data is a typical and challenging scenario in today’s machine learning applications (He and Garcia, 2008). The imbalance refers to the case that the distribution of different data classes is significantly unequal, where traditional learning models will fail to provide accurate predictions. This situation occurs commonly in areas such as security (e.g. spammer detection, where spammers are much fewer in number than normal users) and medicine (e.g. cancer diagnosis, where cancerous patients are much fewer in number than healthy ones). In this paper, we investigate the problem of learning from imbalanced data, in a novel application of pulsar candidate selection. The task to select a small minority of positive data samples as pulsar signals, from a large set of radiation signal data, where other signals are noise, becomes the first challenge. In astronomy, searching for real pulsars is important because they are useful in many astronomy tasks, such as the gravitational wave detection and spacecraft navigation. Therefore, the aim of the paper is to propose a novel framework for classification problems with imbalanced data in general cases, as well as the verification in the specific application of pulsar candidate selection.
Pulsar explores from present-day radio overviews include filtering through candidates distinguished by pulsar search channels, comprising of either single-beat searches or periodicity. These pulsar-explore algorithms are regularly computationally over the top expensive (despite enhancements to their speed and affectability e.g. Cameron, Barr, Champion, Kramer, Zhu, 2017, Smith). The yield of these channels has a large number of candidates, out of which only a small portion comprises pulsars with remaining candidates emerging from radio frequency interference (RFI) or different origins of noise (Keith et al., 2010). Significant numbers of these candidates are evidently investigated and physically screened by space specialists. For current creation pulsar studies, it takes approximately 1–300 s to vet every candidate (Eatough et al., 2010). More than 70,000 h would be needed to examine the million or so candidates. Such a manual visual classification of the pulsar candidates becomes difficult during the Square Kilometre Array (SKA) period, where we hope to find approximately 20,000 new pulsars (Kramer and Stappers, 2015). Despite the fact that the filtering of genuine pulsar signals from noise can be encouraged with graphical utilities, for example in Keith et al. (2009), these signals have impediments, and one is inclined to commit errors (Eatough, Molkenthin, Kramer, Noutsos, Keith, Stappers, Lyne, 2010, Bates, Bailes, Barsdell, Bhat, Burgay, Burke-Spolaor, Champion, Coster, D’Amico, Jameson, et al., 2012). Accordingly, to augment the location of pulsars in the SKA period, the computational expenses amid every one of the means of the pulsar-explore channel ought to be decreased and human intercession should be limited at each progression, comprising the second challenge. An imperative advance in this procedure is robotized the sifting of pulsar candidate obtained from pulsar-explore channels however much as could reasonably be expected.
Among the main approaches in solving the problem of imbalanced data, the sampling-based method is a competitive stream that is the domain of this paper. Studies have presented many base classifiers, in which the total classification execution is improved by utilizing a dataset that is balanced compared with an imbalanced one (Weiss, Provost, Laurikkala, 2001, Estabrooks, Jo, Japkowicz, 2004). These outcomes legitimize the utilization of sampling techniques for imbalanced learning. Regarding synthetic sampling, the synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) (Chawla et al., 2002) is a robust method that has produced an incredible number of achievement in different applications. The SMOTE method makes synthetic data dependent on the feature space likenesses between existing minority samples. SMOTE has been recently utilized for the classification of obscure point sources from the Fermi-LAT index (Abdo et al., 2013), as well as for classification of variable stars from Kepler Bass and Borne (2016). It has additionally been utilized in a pulsar search to handle the class imbalance issues (Devine et al., 2016). Two features selection methods which are Recursive Feature Elimination (RFE), and Grid Search (GS) were used to select as few as possible features of pulsar candidates with SMOTE algorithm for handling the imbalance issue in the dataset (Lin et al., 2020). Hence, the first challenge can be taken care of utilizing SMOTE calculation.
In this paper, we consider the case of pulsar candidate in the image domain. Fig. 1 illustrates the pulsar to non-pulsar candidate’s image in terms of candidate sub-bands, which is two-dimensional array containing the candidate sub-bands or phase-frequency diagram. Recently, learning strategies utilizing deep-learning features have been efficiently connected to resolve multiple computer vision issues (Lee, Grosse, Ranganath, Ng, 2009, Lee, Grosse, Ranganath, Ng, 2011, Bengio, Courville, Vincent, 2013) that prove troublesome. The core idea of deep learning is using forthright representations to learn hierarchical feature representation and then proceeding to develop more complex ones from the preceding level. Compared with the handcrafted models, deep learning design is capable of encoding data that is multilevel from their initial simple nature to a more intricate one. Therefore, for feature learning, this method is highly encouraging because (1) it does not necessitate ground truth; (2) It induces intricate non-linear connections using deep architecture that is hierarchical in nature; (3) It does not depend on chosen handcrafted features but rather is completely driven by data and (4) owing to its trained hierarchical deep network, it is capable of effectively and rapidly determining the feature representation of low-level images. Guo et al. (2019a) utilized the DCGAN model for feature extraction and synthesis of the minor class to overcome the issue of imbalance in the HTRU dataset followed by L2-SVM classifier.Download : Download high-res image (210KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. An illustration of non-pulsar and pulsar candidate representations. The left and right images show a 2D graphical representation of a phase frequency diagram for the non-pulsar and pulsar candidates, respectively.
A pseudoinverse learning algorithm (PIL) Guo and Lyu (2004); Wang et al. (2018); Deng et al. (2019), it is a multilayer perceptron (MLP) learning algorithm composed of stacked generalization connected such that it dominates the neural networks’ (NNs) degradation predictive accuracy. Its structure possesses the identical number of hidden neurons as the number of samples that are to be learned. PIL overcomes learning errors by performing the addition of hidden layers. It had been fully automated, feed-forward and does not contain critical user subordinate parameters, for example, learning rate, the maximum epoch and momentum constants. PIL has been demonstrated to be an efficient algorithm and by far much better than the standard back propagation (BP) and other algorithms of gradient descent. Wang et al. (2017) asserted that PILAE was a fully and fast automated framework that uses deep neural networks to train stacked autoencoders (Hinton and Salakhutdinov, 2006). PILAE trains the stacked autoencoder by embracing the PIL algorithm with a low-rank approximation; PILAE is not a gradient descent method and does not have the shortcoming of gradient vanishing. It also does not have the problem of saturation activation as a matrix that is multiplied by its pseudoinverse. Thus PILAE can be used for handling the second challenge.
Different from our previous work (Guo et al., 2019a) we propose a DCGAN-PILAE model that uses SMOTE algorithm to overcome the imbalance problem and the DCGAN model for extraction deep features in an unsupervised manner. In the PILAE classifier, weight parameters are calculated with the pseudoinverse solution and do not have to be modified further, thus having an important effect on the performance of the model. We investigate the performance of the introduced model on the high time resolution universe (HTRU) dataset.
The paper proceeds to evaluate Pulsar candidate classification related issued in Section 2. Section 3 provides a detailed description of the proposed model. Section 4 presents Implementation details, experimental results and the discussion. Section 5 concludes the paper.
