Regardless of the type of study, be it scientific or humanistic, when students are engaged in learning activities, in which it is often required to read textbooks, technology and different types of media encourage further study that without doubt influences the learning outcomes (Yurdugül & Menzi Çetin, 2015). In a wide variety of available resources capable of supporting learning and teaching (Corrales et al., 2020), ontologies and concept maps have always been the tools that are used for knowledge management and organization (Iqbal et al., 2018). The authors intend ontologies and concept maps as a set of nodes, interconnected by different kinds of associative links (Quillian, 1968) through which it is possible to graphically represent knowledge (Novak & Gowin, 1984) to provide a common background and understanding of a particular domain, or field, of study. These graphic representations are often helpful in understanding the semantic structure of a specific argument that is going to be learned. Knowledge representation, by means of these cognitive artefacts (Norman, 1991; 1993), may help students in their learning experiences.
Learning by reading concept maps may increase students’ ability to construct knowledge from resources even when they are engaged in activities where maps are not directly requested (Chmielewski & Dansereau, 1998). The problem is how to do it and how to notice it.
This research is one of the directives initiated by the Research Laboratory in Media Education and Active Learning (RIMEDI@) at the University of Salerno1. Its general reference context is the use of technologies in teaching from the following points of view: the research and impact on learning.
In this paper, Dynamic Concept Maps (afterwards DCMs) are used in online learning environments as tools capable of stimulating students to study topics in greater detail by using traditional media (in this case, textbooks) and to verify if this process is mutual (if the opposite is also true). To highlight this possible reciprocal and synergic interaction between digital and analogic artefacts (books), the term “remediation” is adopted (Bolter & Grusin, 1999).
The authors aim to understand whether the use of DCMs could stimulate remediation with textbooks and, moreover, if remediation triggers the development of significant learning by encouraging more detailed study from one medium to another and vice versa.
The paper describes this research and allows the reader to clarify certain passages and understand in greater detail the dynamics of remediation. It seems to be original since current reference literature does not contain any sufficient evidence on the effects of these processes on student learning.
Furthermore, it is also worth noting how the students involved are part of a non-scientific course of study where, typically, they are not asked to use technologies. Despite the epistemic subject being related to the role of technological learning environments, the field of research is much wider and requires a more complex theoretical and methodological reference framework. In other words, it is first necessary to outline the theories of learning and teaching on the one hand as well as the considerations on the intertwining of these theories and education technologies on the other.
