Smart cities research has become one of the most dynamic fields in research today (Cardullo et al., 2019; Nurmandi, Roengtam, Almarez, & Kholid, 2017; Visvizi & Lytras, 2019a). Its disciplinary boundaries seem flexible enough to accommodate researchers from diverse disciplines, including engineering and computer science as well as social sciences (Karvonen, Cugurullo, & Caprotti, 2018; Silva & Li, 2017; Toriz Ramos, 2019a). Even if only tacitly, the resultant debate seems increasingly to oscillate around how the effective use of information and communication technology (ICT) might make cities and urban spaces better places to live.
Current academic debate on smart cities represents a thriving field of inter- and multidisciplinary research, providing insights into fields as diverse as urban planning, safe and sustainable architecture, transportation and logistics, green spaces, leisure, tourism, and well-being (Álvarez-García, del Río-Rama, Vázquez-Huerta, & Rueda-Armengot, 2017; Bibri & Krogstieb, 2017; Visvizi & Lytras, 2018a). Insights from smart cities research have been successfully emulated to study rural areas, triggering much- needed debate on smart villages (Visvizi & Lytras, 2018b; Visvizi, Lytras, & Mudri, 2019; Westskog, Winther, & Aasen, 2018).
An important emerging aspect of smart-cities research pertains to the disconnect between the technologically feasible, the politically possible, and the actually usable by end users in smart city space (Engelbert, van Zoonen, & Hirzalla, 2019; Lytras & Visvizi, 2019). Increasingly, there is an understanding that whereas technology’s inroads into city space offer an unprecedented promise, much more consideration needs to be given to the twin questions: (i) How to effectively and sustainably translate advances in ICT into policies conducive to their implementation; and (ii) How to ensure that ICT-enhanced solutions in a city space will be embraced by its end users, i.e. the citizens (cf. van Zoonen, 2016; Visvizi, Mazzucelli, & Lytras, 2017). Gradually, aspects of these considerations are being brought up in the literature, offering valuable insights into the evolution of pervasive and ubiquitous ICT-enabled smart-city services (Belanche, Casalo, & Orús, 2016).
The social impact of smart-city applications constitutes a critical part of this discussion, showing important aspects of this encounter between technology and society in the city space (Cardullo et al., 2019). In this context, the community character of smart cities is stressed (Lee & Lee, 2014; Vanolo, 2016), as well as the individual agency of the city’s inhabitants (Visvizi et al., 2017). Here, especially in connection to personal data sharing (Lytras & Visvizi, 2019; van Zoonen, 2016), the issue of privacy is brought to the center of the discussion. Equally important in smart-city space are considerations of safety and security (Chui, Vasant, & Liu, 2019), knowledge and skills acquisition (Perez del Hoyo & Mora, 2019), and many others. As many have suggested, citizen-centric initiatives aimed at developing knowledge- sharing and learning capabilities are crucial for the success of a smart city (Israilidis, Odusanya, & Mazhar, 2019; Visvizi et al., 2017). Seen from an urban computing perspective, the complex context of smart cities requires a thorough understanding of the needs and expectations of the end users. This article addresses the need for a more integrated and holistic understanding of users’ perceptions about smart cities through the conceptualization, development, and verification of scales relating to their psychological and social beliefs.
Not only is there a need to deliver customized smart-city applications: they must be interoperative. Moreover, it is paramount that the concepts of smart-city, smart-city services and smart-city applications do not trigger new forms of social exclusion, for instance resulting from: (i) a lack of skill to use existing smart applications; (ii) non-existent or ineffective infrastructure (cf. Karvonen et al., 2018; Visvizi & Lytras, 2018b); or (iii) obstacles to accessing existing infrastructure and/or facilities. In this reading, it is imperative that the smart city, both as a social phenomenon and a policy concept, is based on the imperative to build an inclusive society, ensure transparency, and enable civic participation (Simonofski, Serral Asensio, & Wautelet, 2019; OECD, 2019; Visvizi & Lytras, 2019b). From a complementary perspective, it is also vital to ensure the uniqueness of smart-cities applications and services, aiming to suit the individual needs of end users. Finally, in this context every effort needs to be made to ensure privacy, safety, security, and data protection (cf. van Zoonen, 2016). The gap between what is technologically feasible, what is politically possible, and what is usable cannot be bridged without engaging all stakeholders: the research community; the policymakers; and the end users, who are the citizens. While past studies have generated useful theoretical and conceptual insights into the attitudes and behaviors of smart cities’ end users, these have had limitations. To the best of our knowledge, there are hardly any research contributions to the development of constructs connected with users’ psycho-social beliefs specific to smart-cities services and applications.
Recognizing the above shortcomings in the extant literature, we seek to gain an in-depth understanding of the perceptual and attitudinal views of the end users of smart-cities services. We make significant contribution from a theoretical perspective by taking an empirical approach to developing and validating various measures of the perceptions of smart citizens around the globe. In addition, our evidence-based and empirically tested findings provide technology experts, managers, and policymakers with a comprehensive view of end users’ needs and issues regarding ICT-based smart-cities services and applications. This will certainly assist practitioners in using this information as an input for innovation to develop user-friendly smart-city solutions.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In Section 2, a thorough but targeted literature review of smart- cities research is presented. Further, the background of the study is given. Section 3 describes in detail the research methodology for developing the scales. It includes exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis for testing and validating the instruments. In Section 4, the results are discussed, followed by the theoretical and managerial implications, limitations, and suggestions for future research. Finally, Section 5 concludes the research.
