The total world population is estimated to be 7 billion individuals, with a projection of expanding to 9.2 billion by 2050. This expansion will require almost 70% more nourishment because of changes in diet – more dairy and grains – in underdeveloped countries (Food and Organization, 2009). To adapt to such circumstances, it is obligatory to expand the efficiency of the existing cultivation areas, which might be accomplished by a more reliable food chain, and by the utilization of pesticides (Cooper and Dobson, 2007, Kesterson et al., 2015, Wang et al., 2019). Pesticides are chemical compounds used for killing weed plants (herbicides), parasitic (fungicides), or insects (insecticides) (Bon et al., 2014). The utilization of pesticides is spread around the world, representing a $40 billion yearly budget (Popp et al., 2013) with high concentration of synthetic compounds (approximately 2 kg per hectare (Liu et al., 2015)) being sprayed over a wide range of harvests to augment the production of food. Current evidence suggests that farming will confront heavier stress from pests, prompting a higher interest for pesticides (Popp et al., 2013).
To minimize the risk of crop losses because of herbivorous insects and mites, most of the world’s commercial food production systems are subject to several applications of pesticides before being cropped (Cooper and Dobson, 2007, Berenstein and Edan, 2018). Increased usage of real-time automatic section control on agricultural sprayers has led to significant pesticide reductions for farmers (Batte and Ehsani, 2006, Luck et al., 2010, Sharda et al., 2011, Esau et al., 2016). Smart sprayers use sensors to detect and spray pesticide spot-specifically in real-time using individual nozzle control (Esau et al., 2018, Partel et al., 2019). In this situation, it is significant that the right measure of pesticide be sprayed on the harvest fields. Excessive amounts of chemicals may leave residues in the produced food alongside ecological tainting (Gonzalez-Rodriguez et al., 2008, Farha et al., 2018, Witton et al., 2018). If insufficient doses are used there may be areas of the harvest field that are not protected, lessening productivity (Dougoud et al., 2019). For instance, Raj et al. (2012) investigated that spray droplet size is key in the efficacy of pesticides against Asian citrus psyllid. Meanwhile, irregular spray coverage might cause pest and/or weed resistance, or behavioral avoidance (Renton et al., 2014, Martini et al., 2012). Many fertilizers are often applied as liquid solutions sprayed onto plant leaves and soil (Marcal and Cunha, 2008); to assess their pulverization, it is important to quantify the spray coverage, that is, the relative zone secured by the pesticide droplets – usually composed of water carrier, active ingredients, and adjutant. In today’s precision agriculture, several papers investigate the spray drift from agricultural pesticide sprayers and their consequential economic and environmental effects (Preftakes et al., 2019).
The issue of estimating the spray coverage refers to calculating how much pesticide was showered on each piece of the harvest field. The standard way to do that is to disseminate oil- or water-sensitive papers along with the soil and underplant leaves. Then, such cards are covered with a bromoethyl dye that turns blue within the presence of liquid (Giles and Downey, 2003). The issue progresses towards surveying each card by tallying the number of droplets per unit area, by drawing their size distribution, and by evaluating the level of the card area that was covered; these measures enable one to gauge the volume of showered pesticide per unitary area of the harvest. If done manually, this procedure is inefficient and may miss some areas. This is when automatic solutions become essential, including the Swath Kit (Mierzejewski, 1991), a pioneer computer-based procedure that utilizes image processing to asses the water-sensitive cards; the USDA-ARS system (W.C. and A.J., 2005), a camera-based framework that uses 1-cm2 samples from the cards to form a pool of sensor information; the DropletScan (R.E., 2003), a flatbed scanner defined over a proprietary equipment; the DepositScan framework, made of a workstation and a handheld card scanner (Zhu et al., 2011); and the AgroScan System1, a Windows-based software that analyzes the collected cards. Every one of these frameworks are inconvenient to convey all through the field, requiring the collection, scanning, and post-processing of the cards, a tedious and labor-intensive procedure.
An option for image capturing systems is to address the characterization of spray application by using wired or remote sensors (Crowe et al., 2005, Giles and Crowe, 2007). However, those are costly and necessitate constant maintenance. Very recently, Wang et al. (2019) implemented a novel droplet deposit sensing system based on a sensor to store the deposition. Then, the Q-Learning algorithm Watkins and Dayan (1992) is used to accurately determine the droplet parameters from UAVs (Unmanned Aerial Vehicles). In 2019, Wang et al. (2019) implemented a new capacitor sensor system for measuring the spray deposit of herbicide application. Moreover, several non-imaging spray methods have been developed for spray analysis by means of non-intrusive characterization, such as phase doppler particle analyzers (PDPA) (Nuyttens et al., 2009), piezoelectric sensors (Gargari et al., 2019), laser diffraction analyzers (e.g., Malvern analyzers (Stainier et al., 2006)), and optical array probes (Teske et al., 2002). All of them designed to assess the quality of spray coverage, including the droplets’ size and volume.
Alternatively, a number of image-based approaches have been introduced to assess the efficiency of the spraying deposition quality. Such means profit from the advanced innovations found in smartphones (Xia et al., 2015), which convey computing assets powerful enough to enable a wide scope of uses. In the form of a smartphone application, an image-based system is conceivable as a promptly-accessible tool, portable up to the harvest field, to help growers and agronomists in estimating the spray coverage and, consequently, in decisions concerning where and how to pulverize. This is the point of the present investigation, wherein we present DropLeaf - Spraying Meter 2, a wireless application ready to gauge the measure of pesticide showered on water-sensitive papers. DropLeaf enables precision agriculture, with the potential to improve the evaluation of pesticide showering. It utilizes the phone’s camera to register pictures of the spray cards and, nearly immediately, it creates evaluations of the spray coverage using methods based on image processing.
In this context, SnapCard was the first pesticide spray coverage tool developed for running over a smartphone (Nansen et al., 2015, Ferguson et al., 2016). Nevertheless, it presents two drawbacks: i) it calculates the coverage area of the water-sensitive paper only, and ii) it does not allow the user to load a photo from the phone’s gallery. Dropcard with DropScope is a similar and commercial smartphone application that relies on an external water-card reader; currently, it works under restricted card sizes. Table 1 compares our proposed solution to the other smartphone applications developed for measuring spraying coverage. It is worth pointing that the smartphone application named Gotas (Chaim et al., 1999) is not covered since it was discontinued.Table 1. Comparison of different smartphone applications developed for pesticide spraying assessment using water-sensitive paper.Smartphone ApplicationCost and PlatformAdvantagesLimitationsDropLeaf Machado et al. (2018)Websitefree, Android- elaborated user interface  - it calculates several statistical measures  - it works with any card size  - it exports the card measurements- it runs over Android only  - the user must load the card previously cropped using an external photo editorSnapCard Nansen et al. (2015)Websitefree, Android and iOS- elaborated user interface  - it runs over both Android and iOS platforms  - it saves the card measurements- it calculates the coverage area over the water-sensitive paper only  - it does not allow the users to load card photos from the galleryDropCard with DropScope Websitecommercial, Android- it calculates several statistical measures  - it saves additional information based on reports- it demands additional hardware to read the cards  - the segmentation of bigger drops fails  - it does not load from the photo gallery, hampering the reproduction of previous analyses  - it just reads cards of size 7.6 cm × 2.6 cm  - it runs over Android only
