Nowadays, surveillance cameras are used everywhere (banks, companies, markets, roads, and homes) where their recorded videos are employed for crime reduction. However, the video editing task has become effortless because of the availability of video editing software (such as Adobe Premiere Pro, Avidemux, Movie Maker, and Adobe After Effects).
A video is considered as a forged if its content has subjected to manipulation for viewer deceit where his/her decisions and thoughts can be easily influenced using a forged video. Forged videos can mislead the police opinions and law as well as it is visually very difficult to identify. Video evidence used in the court is an example of this case. Hence, checking the authenticity of a video is a vital mission to make the decision fair.
Video forgery detection (video forensics) is a scientific analysis to examine a video for content modifications. These modifications can be categorized either intra-frame or inter-frame based on the modification domain [1]. Intra-frame modifications occur in either spatial or spatiotemporal domain (i.e., frames are partially modified). Inter-frame modifications occur in the temporal domain (i.e., a whole frame undergoes the forgery process). In our work, we focus on inter-frame video forgeries which are widely used with surveillance videos because they are effortless tasks and almost imperceptible.
The purpose of inter-frame forgeries in surveillance videos can be categorized into three cases (Fig. 1):

1.Event removal: by applying frame deletion to remove the frames concerned.2.Event addition: by applying frame insertion to add a foreign clip from a different video.3.Event replication: by applying frame duplication to repeat an event.
Video forensics methods can be divided into active and passive [1], [2]. Active methods require prior information about the examination video like watermarking or digital fingerprints [3], [4]. Most of the videos do not include this information which makes these methods are not effective. Passive or blind methods do not require prior information for identifying a forged video. These methods are more suitable for real-life scenarios because they utilize the traces of forgery. However, most of the video forensics approaches have been proposed based on extracting manual features to trace the forgery, these features sensitive to post-processing operations (which can be utilized by the perpetrator to deceive an investigating team and conceal his crime by distorting the tampering traces) such as noise, blurring, brightness, and compression. Moreover, most of them cannot detect all types of inter-frame forgeries simultaneously. Therefore, they are not able to achieve the performance requirements of real-world applications. To overcome these drawbacks, we proposed a novel inter-frame video forensic integrated system to select the robust features using a convolution neural network (CNN) and fusion of spatiotemporal information. Moreover, Gaussian RBF multi-class support vector machine (RBF-MSVM) is introduced for classification. Our system overcomes previous methods drawbacks, improve the performance and enhance the confidence of surveillance videos authentication and integration. The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:Download : Download high-res image (181KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Inter-frame forgeries.

•We have proposed an efficient feature extraction, which utilizes spatiotemporal average (STP) fusion for each video’s shot and takes advantage of CNN to extract the deep features and reduce post-processing operations (such as Gaussian noise, Gaussian blurring, brightness modifications and compression) effect by employing the pre-trained deep CNN models, where VGG-m1  is used as the feature extractor, which achieves superior results compared with the previous hand-crafted features.•We apply the structural similarity index (SSIM) feature-fusion to produce the deep features of a whole video, which clearly exhibits the tampering traces and leads to high classification accuracy of test videos, irrespective of their compression quality factor.•We are the first to use 2D-CNN and RBF-MSVM to detect inter-frame forgeries in a whole video. Where a few methods [5], [6] utilized 3D-CNN to detect one form of inter-frame forgeries in a single video shot.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly reviews the existing methods in the literature. Section 3 deals with background concepts required for this work. Section 4 discusses the proposed system for detecting various inter-frame forgeries. Experimental results and discussion are given in Section 5. Conclusions and future works are given in Section 6.
