Digital forensics [1] is a legal procedure to collect, analyze, store, and report digital evidence [2], [3]. Such evidence is essential to police investigations because it illustrates the facts of cyber-crime scenes and connects suspects to criminal activities. Therefore, it is crucial to handle the gathered evidence carefully to ensure that it is admissible to police investigations and court trials [4] and to prevent tampering or misconduct. In traditional forensics, the memory limitations of collection devices [5] cause data containing evidence to be continually overwritten over time. While law enforcement can confiscate devices, it is time-consuming and laborious to identify all the pertinent devices located at different and remote locations [6]. All of these scenarios result in delays in reporting evidence. However, it is urgent to report data containing evidence to an investigative cloud to protect lawful evidence and improve the efficiency of investigations. Here, the investigative cloud is a special cloud server that is used for storing evidence for investigations.
To support transparency, immutability, and auditability of when managing such lawful evidence, existing research [2], [4], [6], [7], [8], [9] have resorted to blockchain technology [10], [11], [12], [13], [14]. Unfortunately, they only rely on a weak security model; in addition, they do not cover the entire life cycle of the evidence, nor do they address key privacy issues, i.e., witness privacy and juror privacy. In this work, we build a concrete blockchain-based framework to manage the entire flow of evidence and court data (e.g., the charge, plead, votes, and trial results). Our framework extends from evidence collection and access during the police investigation to the jury voting in the court trial. The life cycle of the evidence is depicted in Fig. 1 which is an extended version of the digital forensics progress model in block4forensics [2]. It consists of collection, examination, analysis, reporting, the court trial, and settlement. Police investigators collect evidence from crime scenes and witnesses. After examination, the police investigators store and upload the evidence for a further analysis conducted by a crime scene analyst. When the analysis is completed, the analyst reports the analysis result. During the court trial, evidence is further accessed and jurors will vote on whether the defendant is guilty or not. Finally, the judge awards a settlement. In the analysis phase, we follow the idea of block4forensics [2], which incorporates different types of data to conduct evidence analyses.
The research questions and problems in this work focus on three aspects of digital forensics. First, we focus on how to manage the evidence throughout its entire “lifetime” in a verifiable and tamper-proof manner, including authorizing entities to upload evidence, authenticating entities that access evidence, and revoking the upload/access rights of targeted entities. For instance, only some entities (e.g., witnesses, police investigators, crime scene analysts, and monitoring devices) can submit their collected evidence to the blockchain. Then, only the entities with a specific attribute set can access the evidence via the blockchain. If an entity has gone rogue or has been corrupted, we need to be able to revoke his/her attributes to disqualify the entity in the blockchain network. Such malicious entities could engage in hostile activities. For example, Bhadresh Gohil, an ex-solicitor, has been accused of forging documents to frame Scotland Yard detectives [15].Download : Download high-res image (192KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. life cycle of evidence.
Second, we emphasize how to protect privacy during evidence management, namely witness privacy [1], [8], [16] in the chain of custody and juror privacy in court trials. Witnesses fear intentional retaliation [17] when they provide evidence at a crime scene or in a police department. Therefore, it is vital to protect their identities against potentially malicious entities, e.g., defendants and their accomplices. Otherwise, they may choose not to provide valuable information in an investigation, which may then be suspended. Jurors vote on whether a defendant is guilty or not, and a judge sentences the defendant according to the votes of the jury. Consequently, considerable amounts of efforts are investigated in determining jurors’ names, home addresses, and votes by people who try to manipulate the trial results. Therefore, the jurors’ identities and votes need to be kept a secret to guarantee their safety [18]. Meanwhile, we need to ensure the verifiability of the correctness of the trial results given that each juror’s vote is not directly presented in plaintext.
Third, we consider how to defend against internal adversaries, e.g., honest-but-curious crime scene analysts and any corrupt police investigators. For the honest-but-curious entities, our objective is to protect privacy as mentioned earlier. However, in addition, there may be corrupt individuals, for example, two corrupt detectives were jailed for sabotaging child abuse by forging documents and concealing evidence [19]. Violations in proper evidence collection can have dramatic consequences, necessitating validation of the evidence throughout the chain of custody. Finally, the computational cost and communication overhead need to be kept within an acceptable range for the blockchain-based system to run sustainably.
To solve these problems, we propose LEChain, which is a blockchain-based lawful evidence management scheme. The LEChain scheme consists of six phases: system initialization, entity registration, evidence collection, evidence upload, evidence access, and court trial and sentences. A trusted authority initializes the whole system, and entities register to this trusted authority. Victims, witnesses, and monitoring devices provide evidence to a police investigator. Crime scene analysts analyze the evidence and send their analysis results to the police investigator, who uploads hash values of all the evidence to the blockchain and stores all the evidence in the police department. Entities can access the evidence via the blockchain if they possess a specific attribute set. Lawyers issue a charge or plead for the accused during the court trial and upload corresponding data to the blockchain. Each juror casts a vote to the blockchain. The judge computes the voting result and uploads the hash value of the court data to the blockchain. In addition to the above operations, there are subsequent operations related to other parties that are also involved in the life-cycle of digital forensics processing. These entities include prisons and insurance companies. We further explain these entities and their possible roles in Section 3.1.
In this study, we make the following contributions:

•We propose the design of LEChain, a blockchain-based lawful evidence management scheme, to better control the entire chain of evidence in digital forensics with transparency, unforgeability, and verifiability. Specifically, we utilize short randomizable signatures to authenticate witnesses’ identities anonymously. We leverage fine-grained access control based on ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption (CP-ABE) [20] to upload, access, and update evidence. We design a secure voting method [21] to protect juror privacy, and we build a consortium blockchain to store all the evidence transactions to provide a transparent, immutable, and auditable supervision of the evidence.•To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to address two key privacy issues, i.e., witness privacy in evidence collection and juror privacy in court trials in forensics investigation. LEChain aims to protect the identities of the witnesses and jurors, as well as the votes of the jurors. We establish a stronger security model for digital forensics. In particular, we adopt the honest-but-curious security assumption for most entities, but we include the possibilities of corrupt police investigators in the security model; such entities can launch several attacks, namely data injection, data falsification, and unauthorized access. Finally, we prove the security and privacy properties of the LEChain scheme.•To show the deployment feasibility and efficiency of LEChain, we build a prototype based on Ethereum1  test network and proof-of-authority (PoA)2  consensus mechanism to evaluate its performance concerning the computational cost, communication overhead, and network latency. We also compare LEChain to existing works with respect to computational cost and communication overhead.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. We discuss related work in Section 2. In Section 3, we present the system model, security model, and design goals. Some preliminaries are reviewed in Section 4. We present the design and working methodology of the proposed LEChain scheme in Section 5, followed by security analysis and performance evaluation in Section 6 and Section 7, respectively. We discuss some related issues in Section 8. Finally, we conclude our work in Section 9.
