The knowledge of the architectural style and elements of monumental heritage is of paramount importance in several fields, in art, art history, tourism,1 architecture, geometry, academia and culture.2 However, recognizing the style or facade elements of historical monuments is reachable only to very few experts.
Machine learning based automatic systems [18], [24] have been barely used to address such task due to the difficulty in obtaining expert knowledge. Indeed, there is neither an established monumental heritage taxonomy for architectural styles and elements, nor automatic tools to help identifying the style or architectural elements of a monument based on the image of its facade.
Most previous works on architectural style identification combine traditional machine learning with computer vision techniques [19], [28], [3], which implies a high level of human supervision and produces models with a reduced generalization capacity [18], [24], [27]. For example, the authors in [24], [27] first use Deformable Part-based Model (DPM) with histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) for features extraction then apply support vector machine (SVM) for classification. Similarly, the authors in [18] addressed the architectural style classification of three styles, Romanesque, Gothic and Baroque by first extracting features with Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) then using SVM for classification.
The authors in [14] used state-of-the-art deep learning (DL) models for the classification of architectural elements such as columns, bell tower, apse, or altar among others. The proposed approach does not identify the architectural style in the input image and can not be used under real life conditions as it requires manual intervention.
The above approaches provide good accuracy but suffer from strong constraints: i) unstructured approaches that are difficult to scale to more styles or elements [3], [27], ii) lack of robustness to different perspectives in pictures [19], and/or iii) unable to perform in real-life conditions [14], [28], [24], i.e., presence of other elements such as trees, people, traffic signals in the input image.
The recent progress in DL networks [8], [15] in general and Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [7] in particular has made several breakthrough in many computer vision tasks, in image classification [22], object detection in images [2], [11], [12] and semantic segmentation [9], [13], [26]. CNNs present a high potential for architectural feature extraction in images [25]. Their ability to learn textures, patterns and colors make them suitable for analytical vision tasks, such as the architectural style classification and the detection of architectural elements in a monument facade image.
Nevertheless, identifying the style or detecting architectural elements of a given monumental heritage facade based on an image of its facade is challenging due to the next reasons:
•Some styles may share the same key characteristic architectural elements.•The facade may contain external elements to the main style because they were appended during restoration process or during their very long construction process.•The conservation state of some monuments can make the identification process more difficult.•Noise, darkness and shadow in the image itself may hide some of the characteristic elements of the style.•The image perspective can deform some similar geometric shapes, e.g. arches.
To build an automatic architectural style classification model and a key architectural element detection model, it is essential to create a dataset that takes into account all the aforementioned challenges. Accordingly, this work addresses the problem by means of MonuMAI (Monument with Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence) framework considering three main axis. Firstly, to design MonuMAI dataset, an annotated monument image dataset based on a new monumental heritage taxonomy of architectural key elements and styles. Secondly, to develop MonuMAI deep learning pipeline for identifying architectural styles or detecting architectural elements in monument images. Thirdly, to provide citizen science based MonuMAI app which integrates both models for performing in real life conditions.
In particular, the contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:
•To design an monumental heritage image dataset taking into account that:–We define the first tree taxonomy that captures the relationship between four of the most distinguishable architectural styles in Europe, Hispanic-Muslim, Gothic, Renaissance, and Baroque, and the key elements that characterize each style. The monumental heritage taxonomy is defined under a close collaboration with three art experts.–We design a multi-task MonuMAI dataset, a quality multi-task monument dataset with two types of annotation which make it suitable not only for classification and detection tasks but also for analyzing explanation methods.•To develop MonuMAI deep learning pipeline considering that:–We develop a lightweight deep CNN called MonuNet architecture, for monument style classification. MonuNet architecture achieves a good balance between the number of layers and trainable parameters along with a low computational cost that is fundamental on low performance devices such as smartphones.–We propose a key architectural element detection model, called MonuMAI-KED model, based on Faster R-CNN [17] object detection mode and ResNet-101 [5] CNN-based model. The detected elements are horseshoe arch, lobed arch, flat arch, pointed arch, ogee arch, trefoil arch, gothic pinnacle, porthole, lintelled doorway, rounded arch, triangular pediment (or pointed pediment), segmental pediment, serliana, broken pediment, and solomonic column.•To provide MonuMAI app,3 a free tool for the automatic extraction of architectural information through the architectural style classification and key elements detection. This app is available for smartphone and via web, as a citizen science based MonuMAI app it helps spreading art knowledge and collecting images to further increase MonuMAI dataset.
Our experiments show that both MonuNet architecture and the key architectural element detection models achieve very good results including in real-life conditions.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the new taxonomy based on architectural styles and elements. Section 3 describes MonuMAI image dataset, a new twofold dataset for classification and detection. Section 4 shows the process for finding the optimal lightweight model for architectural style classification. Section 5 presents MonuMAI app, a mobile application for the general public. Section 6 gives the experimental setup and results that show the suitability of DL models on the new MonuMAI dataset. Lastly, Section 7 gives the final conclusions and future works.
