Adiabatic circuits are believed as a good alternative to the conventional CMOS circuits in terms of reducing the energy consumption. The first reason for this reduction is the slow voltage variation across the transistors, and the second is the ability of recovering the stored energy in the existing parasitic and load capacitors to the power supply. Eliminating the voltage drop reduces the consumed power. In order to eliminate the voltage drops across the transistors, the power supply voltage variations should be very slow. On the other hand, in order to recover the stored energy in parasitic and load capacitors, the power supply must have the ability to recover the energy. Furthermore, it could be considered as an adiabatic circuit, only if obeys the adiabatic switching principles.
In the past few decades, different varieties of circuits have been designed based on the adiabatic switching principles [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. Most of these designs, e.g., SQAL (Secured Quasi-Adiabatic Logic), and ECRL (Efficient Charge Recovery Logic), which are also known as logic families, are dual-rail [1], [2]. A dual-rail circuit is a circuit that takes the actual inputs and their complementary values to produce both actual and complementary outputs. Therefore, the dual-rail circuits are benefited from an inherent hardware redundancy, which could be used to further improve their own reliability against the faults. Nevertheless, this admirable feature has not been studied previously.
The adiabatic families could be used in different areas of interest, such as immuning the circuit from DPA (Differential Power Analysis) attacks [5], [6], [7]. For instance, the SQAL family, which is introduced to be resistant against DPA attacks [1], or the Energy-Efficient Secure Positive Feedback Adiabatic Logic (EE-SPFAL) [5]. While both of these families are more robust against the DPA attacks compared with the ECRL family, according to our evaluations, the ECRL logic family could provide a more fault tolerant circuit design compared to the other two families. charge balancing symmetric pre-resolve adiabatic logic (CBSPAL) is another instance of adiabatic logic families built upon differential cascode pre-resolve adiabatic logic (DCPAL), which is also robust against the DPA attacks [6]. Similar to CBSPAL, the proposed circuits in [8], and [9] have improved the robustness against DPA attacks, but they are all prone to transient faults and are not dependable in terms of reliability.
Due to the wide-spread deployment of resource-constrained embedded devices in different emerging technologies, e.g., Internet of Things (IoT), Remote Health-care Monitoring Systems (RHMS), extraterrestrial and aerospace applications, the utilization of energy-efficient and reliable techniques in their structure is of high importance [10], [11], [12]. These techniques could range from high level approaches to circuit level designs. Accordingly, in the context of reliability, a number of studies have tried to analyze the tolerance of reversible logic families against faults for determining whether they could be employed in such embedded applications or not [13], [14]. To the best of our knowledge, these studies are mainly focused on the gate level. For instance, the Friedkin, and Toffoli gates, which are known as the universal gates in the reversible logic. Nevertheless, our research area is different from the previously published papers, and we have concentrated our reliability analysis on the circuit level. In this regard, we have considered major specifications such as the circuit layout, number of sensitive nodes (nodes that are not directly connected to the Vddor GND[15]), operating frequency, technology size, and many other design time parameters of the circuit, while they have not been considered in the previous studies. It is worthy to mention that there exists a few number of research studies on the design and functional verification of adiabatic circuits, where they tried to consider the design errors [16], [17], [18]. Accordingly, the scope of them differs from that of ours, because we have concentrated on the transient faults, which may occur frequently during the operation of the circuit at run time, while the design errors only occur during the design process.
Recently we have evaluated the inherent reliability of different dual-rail adiabatic logic families against transient faults [19]. In this paper, the injection of various transient faults into the buffer chain of different adiabatic families is investigated. This evaluation was conducted by injecting a fault into the stage of a buffer chain constructed with different adiabatic logic families. Accordingly, based on whether each couple of outputs in the stage have been hit by a fault and whether the fault has been propagated into the next stage or not, we could be in one of the following states: 1) Correct-Correct (C-C), 2) Correct-Faulty (C-F), 3) Faulty-Correct (F-C), and 4) Faulty-Faulty (F-F). F-C and C-F are similar to each other and we both call them as F-C. Meanwhile, based on our experiments, in case of injecting faults into the circuit, most of them would lead into states 2 or 3. This implies that in most of the cases, one of the outputs will be faulty, while the other is carrying the correct value. This is an indication for being able to prevent the propagation of faults to further stages and to provide more reliability with exploiting the inherent hardware redundancy in dual-rail adiabatic circuits.
In this regard, in this paper we propose LWRAP, a Low-Waste Reliable Adiabatic Platform to improve the reliability of dual-rail quasi-adiabatic logic families against transient faults. This improvement has been achieved by employing a Muller C-Element [20]. The C-Element is a simple circuit with low area occupation. In C-Elements, in case of having identical inputs, the output will follow the value of the inputs, otherwise, the output will hold its previous state. In this study we have shown that a C-Element could be charged based on the principles of adiabatic switching. Therefore, with employing a two-input C-Element, we will be able to improve the overall reliability of a dual-rail adiabatic circuit. Our comprehensive experiments, which have been conducted through HSPICE simulations have shown that LWRAP improves the reliability of the circuit by making it robust against the transient faults by up to 12x. LWRAP improves reliability of any chain of adiabatic logic gates but in this paper, buffer chain has been chosen as an example of any adiabatic logic gate chain.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we describe the adiabatic switching principles. In Section 3, the inherent capability of the adiabatic logic families for improving the reliability has been discussed. The adiabatic C-Element is explained in Section 4. The proposed LWRAP has been described in Section 5. Section 6 will represent the observations that have been made by the simulation of LWRAP in different technology sizes. Finally, Our contributions have been summarized in Section 7.
