The smallest number of edges in a k-graph (i.e. k-uniform hypergraph) that is not two colorable is denoted by m(k). Early results by Erdős from 60s [7], [8] determined that the exponential factor of the growth of m(k) is 2k (that is log2(m(k))∼k). In 1975 Erdős and Lovász in [9] suggested that perhaps k⋅2k is the correct order of magnitude for m(k).
Despite a few improvements on the side of the lower bounds (the most recent one by Radhakrishnan and Srinivasan in [12]) the upper bound of Erdős from 1964 has not been improved since. He proved in [8] that (1)m(k)⩽(1+o1)eln(2)4k22k.
This bound results from the fact that the random hypergraph with that number of edges, over the set of vertices of size about k2∕2, a.a.s. cannot be properly two colored. The chosen number of vertices, turns out to give the smallest number of edges in the random construction. Our motivation for taking a closer look on random k-graphs on k2∕2 vertices stems mainly from this fact. Within these constraints we address two problems. First, we show that the bound of Erdős is tight for random hypergraphs. Then, we focus on random k-graphs with smaller number of edges and discuss the problem of finding a proper coloring efficiently.
Analogous problems have been considered in the context of random constraint satisfaction problems, where the size k of constraints/edges was fixed and the number of variables/vertices n was tending to infinity. In that framework, the straightforward first moment calculation shows that if r⩾2k−1ln(2)−ln(2)∕2, then Hk(n,r⋅n) is a.a.s. not two colorable. That observation was complemented by Achlioptas and Moore [3] who proved that, if r<2k−1ln(2)−(1+ln(2))∕2+ok(1), then random hypergraph Hk(n,r⋅n) is a.a.s. two colorable. This is the first of the papers that directly inspire our developments (the bound itself has been later improved in [5] and [6]).
Second result from that area which provides a context for our considerations on efficient coloring, was proved by Achlioptas and Coja-Oghlan in [1]. They discussed the evolution of the space of solutions when successive random constraints are added to the instance. They observed that, at some point, the set of solutions, which in certain sense is initially connected, undergoes a sudden change after which it becomes shattered into exponentially many well separated regions. That behavior has been interpreted as a barrier for effective algorithms. Since that time, for some specific problems, algorithms and their analyses were improved up to the threshold of shattering (see e.g. [4]) but none surpassed that barrier.
The case of our interests, when n=Θ(k2), is slightly different, and most proofs for fixed k do not translate literally. The ideas of the proofs however usually can be applied. As shown by our work, the resulting proofs turn out to be technically simpler. Moreover, since the values like 2k−1 are no longer constants, we were able to obtain the sharp threshold for two colorability of the random hypergraph in many cases. Note that for fixed k, this question is still open (however the results in [5] give very tight bounds). For a similar problem k-SAT with not too slowly growing k, Frieze and Wormald in [10] proved the existence of satisfiability threshold by analogous methods.
