With the rapid growth of global data, mining and analyzing the typical opinions of animated film comments with big data mining technologies is beneficial for the animation creators’ acquisition and analysis of feedback from the audience. Therefore, it is necessary and important to investigate the opinions mining of film comments data from Douban [1].
However, it is quite difficult to obtain massive review information from the Internet. The most common methods are to use search engine results or view reviews to obtain conclusions, or to automatically apply sentiment analysis to subjective text. With the increasing demand for text analysis, in addition to sentiment analysis, opinion mining has gradually become a research topic, leading to the development of sentiment analysis technology.
The typical opinion mining technology uses basic tasks from the field of “Affective Computing and Sentiment Analysis” [2], [3], [4] in order to provide valuable data for product evaluation and decision-making. To this end, it also obtains aggregate sentences with similar views but different expressions, increasing the value of the information extraction. Nevertheless, the characteristics of art products such as movies, are more complicated, and there are few works in the literature dedicated to this issue. The aim of this paper is to fill this gap by applying the typical opinion mining to the field of movie reviews.
For example, the Douban website has gathered a lot of users to participate in the review and scoring of a movie, but the specific reasons for the film’s performance are not known according to the score. In the same movie, the attention of different viewing groups is inconsistent. For example, some other movie going groups pay more attention to the visual effects of movies, and they will give bad reviews because of poor visual effects. However, some moviegoing groups dont care about visual effects, but value movie storylines, then they may miss their favorite movies because of the low score.
Movie ratings given by viewers with different preferences may lead the movie review website to not recommend a movie or to put it at the end of the search results, so that the audience who wants to watch the movie will be unsatisfied, and the movie will miss a viewer. In order to solve these problems, it is necessary to mine all aspects of the evaluation of film comments and extract concise and typical opinions for the reference of movie viewers.
Typical opinions of film comments can be extracted from the visual effects, story plots, special effects, role performances and other aspects of the film. For the viewing group, different viewers have different tastes. Taking animated movies as an example, teenagers pay more attention to the performance of animated pictures and technology, while adults pay more attention to the expression of the plot and connotation of animated stories. Therefore, mining the evaluation from different angles and extracting typical opinions can make it easier for different viewers to filter out the information they need.
Taking “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” as a typical case, this paper analyses several well-known movie review websites in the world, and concludes that although Rotten Tomatoes and IMDb in the United States are the largest movie review websites in the world, with a mature scoring mechanism and many global users, they usually pay less attention to Chinese animated movies. Moreover, Chinese users seldom pay attention to foreign film comments websites because of the restrictions of national policies and the substitution of domestic websites, such as Douban Movie, MaoYan Movie or Mtime.
As shown in Fig. 1, 3148 people participated in the evaluation of the animated film “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” on the IMDb website, with a score of 6.1. The website categorized users of different age groups in detail and gave detailed opinions and guidelines to viewers of different ages.1 Only 163 people participated in the evaluation on the Rotten Tomatoes website.2 Due to the low number of commentators on the two websites, it is not enough to have typical significance and analytical value.Download : Download high-res image (243KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Scoring and Commentary of “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” on US Rotten Tomatoes and IMDb Websites.
Among the numerous film comment websites in China, Douban, Mtime and MaoYan Movie are the three most representative. However, Mtime and MaoYan Movie are mainly aimed at creating a perfect online ticketing system to make profits and movie scoring and film comments are used only as auxiliary tools.
As shown in Fig. 2, the number of users who participated in the evaluation of“Monkey King: Hero Is Back” in Mtime totaled more than 26,732, with a score of 8.1.3 The score of music, pictures, directors and stories of animated movies was calculated according to the score of users on the website. The calculation results were similar and there was no significant difference. The number of reviewers in MaoYan movies totaled 1,112,000, with a score of 9.3 points.4 The number and score of commentators are too high, and there is a certain degree of suspicion about the veracity of the reviews. The total number of people who participated in the evaluation of Douban Movie was 464,097, with a score of 8.3.5 Most users recommended the film, and some users gave low marks. However, the specific problems of the film which caused users to give low marks cannot be known and we need to dig out the specific problems of “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” through typical opinions.Download : Download high-res image (440KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Scores and reviews of “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” on MaoYan Movie, Mtime and Douban Movies.
Although Typical Opinion Mining technology has been applied to other fields, it has not been applied to movie review websites. Therefore, this paper refers to the case of Chinese popular comments websites for extracting keywords (tags) of user comments information.
The user ratings of Peking Peel Roast Duck Restaurant were classified and scored by the public comments, as shown in Fig. 3. Through the calculation of 7389 user ratings, the different needs of users were scored from three levels: taste, environment and service.6 In addition, the public comment also extracts the typical comments of all users. In the complicated comment information, the most critical information is extracted for other user’s reference. This form of extracting key information is also applicable to film comment websites.Download : Download high-res image (191KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. User ratings and reviews of popular comment websites.
Motivated by the above statements, this paper combines the existing opinion mining methods to automatically aggregate the topics of Douban Movie Review Chinese text, and presents the specific comments of the reviewers in a concise and intuitive way. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
•A model based on the typical opinion mining technology is applied to film reviews. Currently, most movie review websites do not use such technology to extract typical opinions, and therefore detailed comments are not available to users and creators. This article proposes the application of this technology to remedy this problem.•This paper presents a framework for mining typical opinions from film comments. We use the crawler software to get the movie review data source and an open source Python Chinese word segmentation tool to segment Chinese words, extract keywords, and get the typical opinions behind them. Finally, we use an opinion mining engine to extract typical opinions of film comments. This paper provides insights for the future development of the mining of typical opinions from film comments data.•Using Word2Vec, an improved K-means algorithm and certain extraction rules, the typical opinions of “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” film comments are extracted.In this paper, we use Word2Vec as a neural network model to transform Chinese text into word vectors. Through Dependency Parsing analysis, we can regularly extract alternative typical opinions, and gather different typical comments expressed by the same sentence with the same semantics. It can show the typical opinions of “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” commentators in an intuitive and distinct way.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 overviews the theoretical basis and the research methods of data mining and typical opinion mining. In Section 3, aiming at the common problems existing in the current lm comment websites, and taking “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” animated lm as an example, the lm comment data of the Douban movie website are analyzed. Using the crawler technology, a TF-IDF algorithm, Word2Vec, some extraction rules and an improved K-means algorithm, the typical opinions of “Monkey King: Hero Is Back” animated lm comments are excavated, and the typical opinions are obtained. The experiments and results analysis are provided in Section 4 and Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes this work.
