The evolution of internet and the web have facilitated the creation of new applications such as social media that allow government organizations to improve their interaction with citizens [1]. Social media is a part of the Web 2.0 philosophy which is characterized by user-generated contents that can be shared in a social environment [2]. Social media was described by Kaplan and Haenlein [3] as “a group of internet-based applications that build on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and that allow the creation and exchange of user-generated content”. Social media applications are creating new avenues for governments to interact and engage with citizens and become more transparent and accessible [4]. Governments across the world are striving to leverage its potentials to transform governments operations specifically in respect of creating networking and increasing citizens' participation [1]. Contrary to e-government websites which are based on one-way interaction, social media serves as a bidirectional communication channel between government and citizens [5,6]. Social media provides an effortless procedure for citizens to access information, communicate, interact, participate and engage with government organizations. These organizations can bring the public sector agenda and provide relevant information on social media platforms which is mostly preferred by citizens' as they do not need to visit government websites to get that information [7]. Social media provides a new way to provide and exchange information through interactive communication between government and public and encourages citizens' participation in government's decision-making processes. However, despite of the potentials of social media and many attempts by government organizations, the lack of citizens' participation in using social media for e-government services is still a serious concern [8,9].
Trust has been identified as a key indicator for promoting citizens participation and building an effective relationship between government and public on social media [8,10,11]. Citizen's fear to share their personal information online with government organizations due to the risk that their information may be exploited either by the organizations themselves or by unauthorized third parties [12]. According to ALotaibi, Ramachandran, Kor and Hosseinian-Far [13], trust in both government and technology are most significant factors affecting citizen's intention to use social media as a government communication channel. Similarly, Warren, Sulaiman and Jaafar [14] also emphasized the need for institutions to initiate necessary measures for promoting citizen's trust towards building a participatory and collaborative relationship between government and public. Trust is one of the major challenges for governments in developing countries to implement their e-government projects [15]. According to Susanto and Aljoza [16], citizen's in developing countries who are used to dealing with poor public services need to trust on e-government services before they decide to use such services. Like any other developing country, the concept of e-government in Pakistan is relatively new and the country is struggling to implement its e-government projects [17]. In Pakistan, citizens' participation in e-government services is at a low level, that is quite evident from its ranking at 148th position out of 193 countries in the survey of United Nations [18]. According to Mahmood and Weerakkody [15], although the implementation of e-government is in its advanced stages in developed world, citizens' trust to adopt these services is still a key challenge for governments especially in developing countries like Pakistan. Similarly, Siddique [19] also stated that citizens' trust in e-government is likely to have a significant impact on successful implementation of e-government policy in the country. Moreover, in a recent study Tufail, Bashir, Sharif and Noureen [20] also found a positive impact of citizens' trust towards their adoption of e-government services in Pakistan. Though previous studies have identified trust as a significant component for citizens' acceptance of e-government services in Pakistan. However, despite of its importance, there has not been much research to investigate citizens' trust aspects to use e-government services in the country. Therefore, more studies are needed in this domain.
Previous research mentioned that the medium/channel used to provide government information and electronic services has a significant role on the perception of citizens' trust and their attitude in using the technology [12,21]. As mentioned by Hussain [22], e-government services are much likely to be adopted in Pakistan with having social media presence, which promotes participation. Government organizations in Pakistan have started to realize the importance of social media platforms to reduce communication gap between government and citizens' and to improve organizational transparency and the process of governance [23]. The federal and provincial offices, regulatory authorities, political parties, bureaucracy and military representatives in Pakistan are using social media to disseminate useful information for interaction with citizens [24]. However, being a relatively new practice of e-government there is lack of prior published research in this domain. The interactive features of social media channels provide a better understating to citizens for using e-government services. It facilitates a two-way interactive communication between government and public. Furthermore, it is important to mention here that trust is also a context specific phenomenon [25]. The high involvement in context of using social media for e-government services makes the need of trust more important as compared to e-government websites where the involvement and interaction between government and citizens' is relatively low [26]. In addition, due to the novel nature of social media in public sector, there has been limited research on citizens' trust perspectives to use social media for e-government services [27,28]. Though a few studies have acknowledged the significant role of citizens' trust in using such services [14,29,30] but without providing a deep understanding on how to generate this trust. Moreover, there have also been calls for future research on citizens' trust aspects to use social media in the government sector, especially to determine their trust behaviour towards government institutions in the context of social media platforms [14]. Therefore, this study develops and validates a model based on multiple antecedents of citizens' trust for government social media services in context of Pakistan. The findings of this study may provide some useful insights for the public sector organizations about citizens' trust behaviour and their acceptance to use social media for e-government services. The results may help government organizations in Pakistan to devise their social media strategies by keeping in view the citizens' trust aspects to promote their participation in such services. Furthermore, it is expected that this study would be valuable to the field of knowledge and the upcoming researchers may use it in their future research. The paper is organized as follows: First, the research model and the proposed hypotheses of the study are provided, which is followed by the methodology employed to carry out this study. The next section of the study presents the results which were analysed by using variance based PLS-SEM through Smart PLS v.3.2.7 software. This section is followed by the discussion and implications of the study and finally, the conclusion is presented with some limitation and recommendations for future works.
