Earthquakes are unpredictable natural hazards that, when they occur in populated areas, raise two big concerns for those who suffer them: first, avoiding injuries and getting to a safe location and second, learning about the safety conditions of their family and friends. Typically, earthquake safety procedures (e.g., self-protection protocols and evacuation routes) address only the safety and security issues. Once they themselves are safe, and while aftershocks may still be occurring, people must to deal with the second matter, most likely under a blackout of utilities and regular communications services, such as mobile or landline telephony and Internet-based messaging. Such infrastructure is usually unavailable because of physical damage, traffic overload, or lack of electricity [1]. To avoid the risk of fire, the electricity supply is usually shut down immediately after the shock, and it is activated only after a case-by-case damage inspection, which in the event of an earthquake can take days. All these reasons contribute to the typical communications blackout that comes after an earthquake [1], [2], [3].
Fig. 1 depicts a simplified and conceptual view of such a communications scenario, where most communications brokers in the affected area (e.g., cellular antennas) collapsed or were shut down. Therefore, civilians and first response organizations in the area need alternatives to interact and coordinate with each other. Typically, first response organizations (firefighters, police, emergency medical services, government agencies) already use VHF/UHF radio systems for their communications [4], but such an infrastructure is usually not available to support interactions among civilians or between them and the first responders.
In the absence of the usual means for contact in such situations, many people drive their private vehicles to reach the home of their loved ones to learn about their condition. These actions not only risk the personal integrity of the travelers, but they also hamper the work of incident response teams. Since public transportation systems are stopped for safety reasons, further limiting the capability of civilians to reach their family and friends, those who have no means of transportation stay at home, sheltering in place, as that is usually the meeting point assumed by families—and the approach recommended by most earthquake safety procedures, except for those areas under risk of a tsunami. So, people typically wait for others to contact them, with increasing anxiety and concern that might damage their emotional health.Download : Download high-res image (446KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Typical communications scenario after an earthquake.
Most studies of communications during and immediately after an earthquake have focused on incidence response teams or civilians that are not located in the affected area  [5], [6]. However, some recent research efforts have examined whether civilians could support particular activities in the disaster response processes (e.g., damage evaluation, communicating requests for help [7], [8], and identifying the locations of people in large urban populations and steering them to safety [9]). Regardless of this progress, communication with civilians, and their participation as human sensors and information consumers, are issues that must be addressed. comprehensive approach, where human beings and their devices become active elements in such a process (i.e., it should evolve towards an Internet of People (IoP) interaction paradigm [10]).
To foster the participation of civilians in first response activities, this article proposes a communications system named LoRaMoto, aimed at helping civilians exchange information about their safety with their family and friends and also with first responders in the aftermath of an earthquake. Moreover, since such information is geolocalized and coded, it can be aggregated and then used to support decision-making by first response teams or government authorities. For instance, such information could be used to create a heat map of the affected area or to identify places where assistance is more required. In this sense, allowing the participation of civilians as human sensors is crucial for providing information almost in real time to support decision-making at higher levels.
The LoRaMoto system is based on and extends the LoRaWAN architecture, using LoRa radio technology to transmit information between the end nodes (i.e., users at their homes and workplaces) and an application hosted at such places as an emergency coordination center. This avoids the need for a cloud-based deployment. The interaction between the users and the system is performed with a small LoRa-based device installed at the user’s home, using a software application on a personal communications device (e.g., a smartphone). The software application uses the LoRa-based device as the interface to exchange messages with the LoRaMoto system. Regarding the underlying technology, we opted for LoRa because it allows the implementation of dedicated and single-purpose solutions based on the Internet of Things (IoT). This allows control of access to the network and message traffic, and it does not consume much energy. The last three features help the proposed infrastructure extend the amount of time such a service will be operational after an earthquake, compared to the typical service availability of Internet Service Provider (ISP) networks.
This proposal builds upon the authors’ previous work in [11]. In particular, this extended version includes a congestion control protocol, based on Acknowledgment (ACK) messages, that includes a feedback mechanism to enhance end-users’ interaction. Moreover, it extends previous work beyond the LoRaWAN framework to enable direct communication between end nodes. This capability includes a packet-forwarding mechanism that improves the resiliency of the system in the event of network infrastructure failures. The performance and capability of the system were evaluated through simulation. The results show that the proposed approach improves on the earlier one. It can also support the stated communication among citizens and keep first response and emergency management organizations informed.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. The next section explores the most significant research in the domain. Section 3 describes the technical background of the LoRa radio technology and the LoRaWAN architecture. Section 4 describes the communications system and its underlying technology and architecture. Section 5 explains the modeling of the scenario in which the proposed system was evaluated. Section 6 explores different aspects and capabilities of the communications system, presenting and discussing the results of the simulation. Section 7 presents a discussion that positions this paper’s contributions in the context of related work. Section 8 highlights the conclusions and provides suggestions for future work.
