The demand for the Internet of Things (IoT) increases with the passage of the time, due to its induction in every aspect of life [1]. Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) open the door of IoT technologies in the real world from its previous experience by sensing, collecting, and processing information at a remote location [2]. WSNs contains hundreds or thousands of wireless nodes, which collect information according to their assigned task and share it with a remote destination. Similarly, IoT is the revolutionary technology, which interconnects billions of sensor devices to form a heterogeneous network over the Internet.
Wireless sensor devices, which are called the building blocks of IoT has the capabilities to collect, store, process, and communicate the information in the network. The interconnection of these devices in a heterogeneous environment brings a lot of challenges for the research community, such as network architecture, efficient data collection, security, storage, and reliable traffic management. Moreover, wireless sensors are susceptible to various threats, due to their limited resources such as onboard power, memory, communication, and processing. Therefore, an efficient communication infrastructure of sensor devices can maximize its performance in terms of accurate results with minimal resource utilization [3], [4].
In the real world, where IoT networks are deployed have some associated issues, such as radio resource management of sensor devices. Therefore, this problem became very challenging for the research community, because the number of smart devices is very large to interconnect and established a communication infrastructure. Similarly, the overall performance of any wireless network greatly depends on the dimensional resources of participating devices such as frequency, time slot, channel fluctuation, and network traffic. Moreover, the induction of IoT devices in new applications increases the importance of these devices for improved spectral efficiency in terms of PLR, throughput, and latency [5], [6].
In the heterogeneous environment of IoT networks, the battery lifetime of sensor devices is the main concern to be considered, because these devices use hop count information to transmit their collected data from source to destination location. Likewise, as the number of sensor devices increases, the traffic congestion in the network is also increasing, which uses the battery power of deployed sensor nodes to process this information in the network. Therefore, the heterogeneous communication infrastructure and high traffic rate increases the power consumption of the sensor devices onboard battery power, which at the end minimizes the overall lifespan of the deployed network [7].
Moreover, the severity of battery power utilization increases, when the source device is at some distance from the edge node/base station (BS). The energy consumption of sensor devices in the transmission increases with a faster rate with high distance parameters, which decreases the network lifetime [8]. Routing protocols in wireless technology play a vital role to address load balancing, security, and efficient traffic management related issues. Therefore, routing protocol in wireless technology such as WSNs, Ad hoc networks, and IoT is still a hotspot area for researchers to devise new techniques and resolve this issue. Sensor devices have limited battery power, therefore, they need efficient utilization to extend their lifecycle in an operational network.
The literature of IoT in terms of load balancing schemes contain various cluster-based protocols that have been used in the recent past to address the load balancing issue [9]. Most of the researchers used the Low-energy adaptive clustering hierarchy (LEACH) protocol in their proposed models to address the aforestated issue of load balancing in IoT. Although, LEACH protocol play significantly will to address the load balancing issue in IoT network, but the formation of clusters in an operational network creates network overhead specifically in LEACH protocols. Sometimes, dynamic cluster head selection with continuous rate consumes extra energy of specific sensor devices, because this device is selected as a cluster head nodes repeatedly, which leads to minimize their lifespan in the network. Consequently, some other routing protocols had been discussed in the article to address the load balancing issue in IoT networks [10]. In the case of single-hop communication, some schemes had been discussed in the literature, but once the distance between the source and base station is increased, then the energy consumption of the source node is also increased which minimizes the lifetime of a sensor device in the network [11]. Likewise, in multi-hop communication infrastructure, the sensor devices closer to the base station consumes more energy and it is easy for them to die soon as compared to other ordinary devices of the network [12]. The Energy Efficient Clustering Scheme (EECS) was designed to make the cluster formation at some distance from the base station to resolve the load balancing issue in the IoT network. The suggested scheme was failed later on, because the formation of the cluster head at a distance from the base station consumes more energy while processing the collected information of connected sensors, which minimizes network lifespan [13]. The Energy-efficient routing scheme was proposed in the article [14] to resolve the load balancing issue in IoT networks. This scheme uses the residual energy information of sensor devices to schedule traffic in the network.
Although, the suggested techniques in literature have some benefits with associated limitations to address the load balancing issue in IoT. Therefore, this field is still open for the research community to design new protocols or modify the existing protocols to resolve the load balancing issue in IoT with minimum network cost and maximum results. To resolve this issue, in this paper, we proposed an energy proficient routing scheme, which is known as Dynamic hop selection static routing protocol (DHSSRP). The proposed scheme manages the network traffic on priority based information in a congested-free communication environment to balance the energy consumption of participating sensor devices and extend network lifetime.
The proposed DHSSRP manages network traffic on priority based information and suggests an alternate route to the adjacent sensor devices for communication in the network. Moreover, to elaborate the concept of the proposed model, once an ordinary sensor device detects relevant activity according to their assigned task, it broadcast an alarm to acknowledge the priority of his information in the network. The neighbor’s sensor devices react to the acknowledgment message by following an alternate route for communication in the network. Similarly, the message pass through route is bound for the defined interval of time, where the event of priority information exists. Likewise, this route did not advertise its hop count selection for neighbor’s sensor devices until the defined interval of time specified for priority base information communication or exchange.
In converse, the adjacent ordinary sensor devices advertise and update their routing table for hop selection information to process their collected data in the network by following the shortest possible path to destination device/location. The proposed DHSSRP in this fashion manages the network traffic to minimize network overhead, avoid congestion, maximize throughput, minimize PLR, and prolong the lifespan of an individual sensor device. Similarly, the proposed model prolongs the network lifetime with balanced energy consumption.
Moreover, the abbreviation and symbol used in the paper are shown in Table 1.
The overall paper is organized as Section 2 of the paper overviews the related work, while Section 3 of the paper contains the contribution and research gap. Section 4 of the paper presents the proposed model and its mathematical structure. Section 5 of the paper overviews the implementation and captured results of the proposed model during simulation. Finally, Section 6 summarizes the paper with future work.Table 1. List of notations used in this paper.NotationsDescriptionλPriority class messages rateFtBusy/sleep statenxActive queuexPriority classPr(x)Transmission probability of class xmxs backoff stateRTXRetransmission state of class xPbusyBusy probability(Wx,1,y)Post backoff processqProbability of sensor device to transmit priority messagePr B—lProbability of specific busy routeτxPriority time slotSxNormal trafficP(r)(s,x)Probability of successful transmissionLxSize/length of packet payloadTs,xRequest to send for priority class xTs,xClear to send for priority class xHPacket headerlLength/size of packet headerδPropagation delay during transmission5(SM)Define interval of time for five consecutive messagesEdelayExpected delayσTx2Variance in packet arrival timeA[Tx]Average transmission delayBxNumber of neighbors hop countF(x)Freezed hop count during priority transmissionE(Rx)Average number of retried packetsTwaitWaiting timeEdelay(x)Expected delay for class xMSBMaximum size of the burstD(Bmax)Maximum delay bound timeDPData priorityρData rate during transmissionSImaxMaximum service timeSIminiMinimum service timeTx
ODmaxMaximum opportunity transmissionTx
ODminiMinimum opportunity transmissionRframeBuffered frame size
