The Internet-of-Things (IoT) or interacting cyber–physical systems (CPSs) require the integration of many different, potentially heterogeneous, entities. This results in system-of-systems [1] or even interwoven system [2] constellations. To build those systems, integration—“the process in which several component (sub-)systems are brought together and interconnected into a unified system” [3]—is a necessity. However, integrating those large scale, heterogeneous entities for enabling cooperative behavior is a very challenging task [4]. Additional characteristics of these systems, such as mobility, influence the system performance and increases complexity, especially in dynamic environments with on-going changing conditions.
Research in the field of self-improving system integration (SISSY) [3]—also called self-integration— emerged as a response to the growing complexity of integrating resources in large-scale open constellations of systems. According to [4], typical system domains include high-performance computing, power management systems, vehicular traffic, and socio-technical systems. Especially in the context of a set of autonomous, adaptive systems working together and forming a system-of-systems, the integration is a very complex task due to the limited predictability of system behavior. Additionally, as those autonomous resources follow their own – potentially conflicting – objectives [5], the integration is additionally challenging. Consequently, resources that are disadvantaged by the cooperation might decide not to participate. To tackle this issue, we describe several coordination mechanisms that can help to identify a solution for cooperation that balances the disadvantages across several instances in our previous work [6]: Those coordination mechanisms can be categorized into decentralized (selfish behavior, altruistic behavior, negotiation) and (pseudo-)central approaches (enforcement of central decision making, rewards/incentives).
In this paper, we focus on an incentives-based view on system integration. We present several strategies on how to incentivize resources to integrate themselves into a large system composed of interacting, cooperative resources based on direct or indirect compensation for negative impacts, i.e., fewer benefits of some systems in comparison to the other integrated systems resulting from the system integration. In line with research in the SISSY community [4], we focus on a use case from the domain of vehicular traffic and apply those strategies for platooning. Platooning describes cooperative driving of automated vehicles driving with small inter-vehicle distances of 5–10 m [7]. Those vehicles benefit from slipstream effects due to air drag reduction resulting in energy savings. Additionally, the global traffic flow is optimized by the homogenization of velocities as well as increased traffic throughput. However, the vehicles in such a platoon experience unequal benefits depending on their position in the platoon. Especially the lead vehicle experiences reduced fuel savings and, in some platooning approaches, its driver has to drive manually whereas other vehicles can follow in a self-driving mode; hence, those drivers do not have to control their vehicles. Consequently, the coordination of platooning, including the assignment of vehicles to platoons, is a challenging task as it represents a multi-level, multi-objective optimization problem [8]. As each of the vehicles act as a self-adaptive system [9], the coordination requires incentives and compensation to convince vehicles to participate in platooning.
The main focus of this paper is a study of compensating negative impacts or fewer benefits resulting from system integration in the domain of platooning. Here, we focus on integrating platooning with other traffic participants, i.e., the compensation mechanisms should not negatively influence other traffic participants. By negative impacts we refer to fewer benefits for some of the vehicles of a platoon compared to the other vehicles in the same platoon. Accordingly, our contributions are threefold:

•First, we propose an incentive model for improving the fairness of system integration optimized for platooning.•Second, we propose mechanisms for indirect compensation of negative impacts resulting from system integration in a platooning case study.•Last, we discuss the identified challenges exemplified in the context of typical SISSY systems.
Next, Section 2 describes the domain of platooning coordination in the context of system integration. Afterward, Section 3 presents an overview of incentive models for platooning as well as related work from the SISSY community. Based on this overview, we derive a taxonomy for compensation-centered incentivization for system integration and exemplify this taxonomy for platooning in Section 4. We further design different mechanisms for compensation of negative impacts for individuals resulting from system integration in Section 5 and evaluate them w.r.t. fairness and system performance. Section 6 evaluates the proposed methods and summarizes the results. Section 7 discusses those results. Finally, Section 8 concludes this paper.
