In recent years, paid SQA communities have been developing like wildfire in China, especially under the tide of the sharing economy (Cheng, 2016; Hamari et al., 2016). Social question-and-answer (SQA) services, most of which have been free in the past (e.g., Quora, Yahoo!Answers, etc.) are starting to launch paid services (e.g., Weibo Q&A, Zhi, Fenda, etc.). The paid SQA business is promising along with the e-commerce and Internet are highly developed (Su et al., 2018), and many users of Q&A communities are gradually accepting and recognizing this emerging business model, and are beginning to migrate from traditional free SQA communities to paid SQA communities (ChinaIRN, 2020). It is reported that 75% of users of SQA services in China are willing to pay for high quality content (Feng, 2017). By February 2020, the number of paying users on Zhihu has increased fourfold compared with the same period of last year. China's online paid knowledge market is approximately RMB 4.71 billion in 2017 and is expected to reach RMB 23 billion by 2020 based on the higher aggregate demand (iResearch Global, 2018; ChinaIRN, 2020).
The operational mechanism of a paid SQA service is different from that of a free one, as shown in Figure 1. In a free SQA service, askers pose their questions for free to the entire user population, and the answers are posted for all to see. Any answerer can volunteer a response, and all the answers are available to everyone (Harper et al., 2008; Shah et al., 2009). Unlike a free SQA service, paid SQA services request payment from the askers, who direct their questions to specific experts (i.e., answerers), and the answerers are paid only if they provide answers before a stated deadline. Others (i.e., listeners) who are curious about an answer need to pay for it. Listeners make payments to both askers and answerers, in addition to the fee charged by the third-party payment platform and the paid SQA service (Zhao et al., 2020). Thereby, the askers and answerers have a chance to obtain additional monetary rewards.Download : Download high-res image (343KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The operational mechanisms of free (a) and paid (b) SQA services
In general, such mechanisms of paid SQA services bring tripartite benefits for the online paid knowledge platforms, knowledge providers and consumers (Su et al., 2018). Moreover, the SQA services possess a number of distinct features compared to other online paid platforms or traditional paid knowledge communities (e.g., MOOCs). Firstly, the interactions between askers and answerers are unique. The answerers set the amount of money that the askers should pay for the questions in SQA service, while in other services mainly vendors set this. Moreover, the interactions between the askers and answers create additional value and benefits for the knowledge consumers (Chen et al., 2019). Secondly, knowledge is hard to evaluate with objective criteria and users need to spend time and effort learning it after paying for it (Cai et al., 2020; Su et al., 2018). Moreover, knowledge products on SQA platforms are often fragmented and contain contextual knowledge, and therefore more adapted to the fragmented consumption of users (Cai et al., 2020). Thirdly, in other paid services, which mostly consider the freemium model, users pay for the added features, goods or services in addition to the services provided for the free users; while in SQA services, users choose either free services or paid services. All these features make the switching behaviors of users in SQA services more complicated and worth further investigation. Along with the paid SQA services become prevalent, and many users are switching to them from free services, empirical studies on user switch behavior are scarce (Analysys, 2019; iResearch, 2018).
Switching does not mean completely abandoning the use of an incumbent free SQA service (a service that one is already using); it refers to a situation where users reduce their use of incumbent free SQA services, so that the paid SQA service gradually takes priority. Although previous studies have investigated users’ motivations for using both free SQA services (Choi et al., 2012, Choi and Shah, 2017, Jeon and Rieh, 2013, Shah et al., 2008) and paid SQA services (Zhao et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019a), few prior studies have explored the factors that influence users’ motivations for switching from free to paid services. As shown in Figure 1, the information experience of the askers in a paid service is quite different from that in a free service. Thus, when switching from free to paid SQA services, askers are undergoing some behavioral changes. For this study, we chose askers as our focus of research and explored the factors that influence their switching from free to paid SQA services.
Meanwhile, the factors that affect switching behavior may vary significantly within the context, that is, before or after a switch. Prior literature indicates that the perceived value to consumers varies, based on their experiences with information consumption (Rusho & Raban, 2020). Moreover, the degree of influence for factors linked to willingness to pay differs between potential and real consumers (Chu & Lu, 2007). In a paid SQA service, answers can be considered an information commodity involved in transactions between askers and answerers. To better understand askers’ switching behaviors and to discover effective incentive mechanisms to attract askers, it is necessary to determine the important factors that prompt askers to switch from a free to paid service before and after the switch. In this study, after identifying these factors, we compared the differences between the influence of the factors before and after switching.
To the best of our knowledge, this study is one of the first attempts to explore factors that affect askers’ switching behaviors and to compare the behavioral influences of the factors before and after a switch. Both pre-purchase and post-purchasing satisfaction of knowledge consumers play important roles in revealing valuable knowledge products and dedicated knowledge providers (Zhang et al., 2019b). This study not only provides a comprehensive analysis of the influencing factors that affect the askers’ switching behaviors, but also sheds light on the different managerial strategies of the payment-based SQA service in two points of time, that is before and after the askers’ switching behavior. The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. First, we compare the operational mechanisms of the free and paid SQA services and review the related literature about users’ motivations and participatory behaviors in the context of SQA. Then, according to the push-pull-mooring framework, factors that influence askers’ switching behaviors are identified using the critical incident technique, and the weights of the influencing factors before and after switching are compared using the entropy weight method. The findings are reported and discussed, and the implications, limitations, and recommendations for future work are presented.
