All engineering disciplines, and in particular, aerospace ones, are based on mathematics, which serves as a language capable of rigorously describing the reaction peculiarities of a material, a unit, or of the entire system to various external actions. “The great book of nature,” wrote Galileo, “is written in mathematical language” [1]. In spite the fact that some solutions in engineering practice are chosen from experience or by the reasons far from being economically or scientifically efficient [2,3], the majority of engineering solutions are based on precise numerical analysis. The wish for the most accurate calculations is especially relevant in aerospace applications [4,5], in which hardware can operate under extreme conditions and each kilogram of payload has to be justified [6,7].
The grounds for the ability to compose concrete mathematical models for a problem are laid already in elementary school, but only in senior classes (during final years of school education) students of targeted physics-mathematics schools become familiar with the engineering-specific mathematical apparatus. At the same time, there is an issue associated with the transition from the “ability” level to the “fluency” level. Our observations during additional practical courses and laboratory works with pupils of specialized lyceums [8] show that modern education programs in math open wide possibilities for practical applications in tasks of different complexity level. However, the percentage of real-world problems decreases drastically as the senior class is approached.
During lessons, school pupils are taught to solve known equations, geometric problems, and know how to plot graphs of mathematical functions. As a rule, such tasks are abstract and do not model real processes: for example, to solve a triangle or a quadratic equation for a variable “x". This helps one to deal with standard problems, but it does not teach how to recognize them in practice [9]. In turn, this weakens interdisciplinary relations between mathematics, physics, chemistry and informatics, and hence the school knowledge is not assimilated completely. Most importantly, lacks in engineer specialization start to emerge 2–3 years after the university enrolment [[10], [11], [12]].
