The solution of the original passive suspension system of the 2S1 tracked platform is based on torsion bars. These bars are problematic elements. Problems with these elements are associated with their length and location of them in the vehicle. Because of their reactive character, which during explosion of an anti-tank mine may destroy the suspension system, they should be replaced with another solution. This destruction could be also harmful for a crew of the vehicle. An alternative solution may allow to replace reactive elements from under floor space to the vehicle sides. One of possible solutions of the problem is application of the helical springs. They were analyzed by Taktak et al. [17], with usage of the Finite Element Method (FEM). FEM computer applications are a good solution also for the analysis of other kinds of springs. This is very popular method of flexible bodies analysis, but there are also others, like method applied by Mellouli et al. [10] for free vibration analysis, the mesh-free Radial Point Interpolation Method. The helical springs could be problematic in application to the tracked vehicle, which was previously based on torsion bars. The suspension of the vehicle would require more interference in its structure than in the case of a torsional system with other parameters. The FEM model application for various kinds of springs was developed in collective work edited by Shimoseki et al. [16]. A solution worth considering is the use of torsion springs. At this point, a question appears. This question is associated with the kind and construction of above mentioned torsion springs. The answer will be put forward by us in the first section of our paper. But before this, we have analyzed constructions of full tracked vehicles and also modeling solutions, which may be applied in the tracked vehicle model. A complex vehicle model was described by Campanelli and Shabana [3]. For analysis of the track link natural frequencies mode they use FEM. Less complex models of tracked vehicles were described by Nabagło et al. [11], [12]. The model developed in [12] was based on proving ground measurements described by Jurkiewicz et al. [4]. It included many important elements of tracked vehicle model. One of the most important problem in this area is associated with joints between track segments. Ryu et al. [15] take under consideration single pin track link. He describes the so-called rubber bushing model, which connects two track links. Lee [6] in his article describes contact forces between wheels, track links and ground surface. There is also explained a numerical method of force contacts calculation. Details of this connection forces, contact forces between wheels, track links and road surface and also FEM model construction of the flexible body are described in ADAMS Documentation [2]. Selected parts, with high fidelity of real parts shapes, may be designed in other CAD programs. Łukaszewicz [7] in his article, explains multi-body CAD designing problem for simulation applications. For springs, the failures and fatigue damage are very serious problem. The expression of this problem was described by Prawoto et al. [13]. They analyze not only construction but also materials from which the springs are built. As it was said, the basic approach to the modeling solution is also important. The authors of the presented article used tools provided by MSC.ADAMS and MATALB programs, but they were also familiar with other solutions. Because the contact between spring arms is a serious problem in the torsional springs models, very valuable information was put forward by Lankarani et al. [5]. They described a detailed parameterized model of the contact force. This model is usually applied in the ADAMS program. Above mentioned models of subsystems may be connected as parts of tracked vehicle model applied in the dynamical simulation, similar to the simulation described by Wong [18].
In our paper we try to show that the use of hyperbolic springs increases the safety of the crew, allows to significantly increase the weight of the vehicle, and at the same time to maintain the stability of the vehicle at the same, or even slightly higher than in the case of the suspension based on torsion bars. We would like to emphasize that the very idea of a hyperbolic spring is so new and unique that at the present stage of the research presentation we do not discuss the topic of improving the vehicle dynamics, but only show that it could replace the torsion bars, used so far. The optimization of the spring structure in terms of improving the dynamics of the vehicle is planned in further research. This is the first work on full view of construction of the hyperbolic spring which we have published. For comparison, other solutions of spiral torsion springs are presented [3] (see Fig. 1, Fig. 2). The mechanical structure of the hyperbolic spring discussed earlier has not been found in the literature.Download : Download high-res image (90KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Archimedes spiral shape (a) and logarithmic spiral shape (b) springs [4].Download : Download high-res image (51KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Mounting system of the torsion bar (a) and the torsion springs package (b) [4].
