For humans, the respiration and digestive systems share the same entrance, therefore, protecting the airway from food bolus entering the trachea or lungs is a fundamental requirement for safe swallowing. Laryngeal vestibule (LV) closure has been considered the first line of defense against swallowed material entering the airway [1], [2], [3]. Likewise, the duration of LV closure is a predictor of airway invasion during swallowing. If the laryngeal closure is absent or its duration is too short, this can lead to aspiration/penetration [4], [5]. Aspiration has been considered as a major concern for individuals with dysphagia (swallowing disorders), especially in neurologic and neurodegenerative diseases, where aspiration-related respiratory infections are a leading cause of death [6]. Therefore, proper evaluation of LV closure and duration could provide an objective outcome measure to improve the assessment of swallowing safety, provide clinical evidence of increased risk of airway compromise during swallowing, and guide the instigation of appropriate compensatory interventions.
The videofluoroscopy swallowing study (VFSS) is the only instrumental assessment technique that can visualize the event of LV closure and determine its duration during swallowing through the kinematic analysis of radiographic images [6], [7], [8]. However, practical issues will raise when the VFSS is implemented: it exposes patients to radiation, and is not feasible in all facilities without x-ray departments or qualified clinicians to perform and interpret the VFSS images. [9], [10]. Additionally, it is not suitable for the cases in which patients prefer not to undergo x-ray testing or when patients are unable to participate in the examination protocols [10], [11], [12], [13].
Furthermore, there are certain limitations of the ordinary clinical setting preventing the more frequent temporal analysis of swallowing events using VFSS images which provides quantification of LV closure at baseline and assessment of treatment efficacy. Frame-by-frame review of VFSS video is time-consuming and some clinicians may not have the ability to record VFSS images for secondary review due to lack of equipment or limited access to archived materials. Clinicians tend to comment on whether and at what phase of the swallow, the material enters the laryngeal vestibule without determining whether LV closure itself was shortened, further limiting inferences that can lead to treatment decisions [14].
Because of the previously mentioned drawbacks and limitations of VFSS in the detection of LV closure and reopening, it would be practically beneficial for patients and clinicians to investigate an alternative, non-invasive tool. High-resolution cervical auscultation (HRCA) is a promising non-invasive method for dysphagia screening assessment and management [15]. It uses high-resolution accelerometers and microphones, attached to patients’ necks to record vibratory and acoustic signals during swallowing [16], [17]. The advantages of such a sensor supported approach include mobility, cost-effectiveness, non-invasiveness, and suitability for day-to-day and even minute-to-minute monitoring [15], [18]. To investigate the relationship between the signals and the LV shifting, previous studies postulated the cardiac analogy hypothesis that explained the elusive physiologic cause of swallowing sounds [19]. This theory suggested that cervical auscultation acoustic signals are generated via vibrations caused by valve and pump systems within the vocal tract. Moreover, HRCA signal features have been found to be associated with LV closure onset and LV reopening [20]. The slapping of the epiglottis and aryepiglottic fold may provide the valve activity that generates swallowing sounds and neck vibration which can be recorded with HRCA.
All these studies indicated the possibility of detecting the LV closure and reopening, and a method of determining the closure duration solely based on the HRCA signals. However, no studies attempted to quantitatively implement such an idea. The main challenge was that the explicit dependencies between the signal features and the LV behaviors were not mathematically established. In this study, we sought to investigate the ability of HRCA signals to identify LV status with an advanced deep learning model, which approximated the relationship with training examples. We hypothesized that the computer-aided algorithm with HRCA signals which were acquired from the neck was able to detect the event of LV switching, and estimate the duration of LV closure.
The machine learning and deep learning methods have already become powerful tools in the health-care applications and widely employed in the computer-assisted diagnosis for swallowing, laryngeal and neck disorders or disease [21]. Based on larynx contact endoscopic video images, Esmaeili et al. attempted to apply support vector machine, k-nearest neighbor, and random forest to classify benign and malignant lesions on the superficial layers of laryngeal mucosa [22]. For early stage diagnosis of laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma, Moccia et al. implemented a support vector machine classifier with features extracted from the laryngeal endoscopic frames, and they achieved 93% sensitivity [23]. For the similar purpose, Araújo et al. applied transfer learning with pre-trained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models to process laryngoscopy images, and they achieved state-of-art performance [24]. Our previous study also performed multi-scale CNN filers for hyoid bone detection on the VFSS images [25]. All those studies were conducted based on images as model input. Only several studies attempted to use signals in time series as input and build up deep learning models to serve the swallowing or laryngeal applications. Our previous research verified that the on-neck sensor signals can effectively identify swallowing activity, track hoyid bone and segment upper esophageal sphincter opening with the help of deep learning [26], [27], [28]. However, more studies are needed for analyzing the LV closure.
In this study, we used a deep learning architecture with the combination of CNN and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), which composed an artificial intelligence topology with high nonlinearity to build the relationship between the sensor signals and the LVC duration. To verify the efficacy of the proposed method, we developed the model with a dataset of 588 swallowing samples and a 10-fold subject cross-validation technique as used. Then we applied the model on an independent dataset with 45 new samples as a testing set for analyzing the capacity of generalization.
