With rapid advancement in technology, the healthcare industry has been producing and collecting data at a staggering speed. However, raw data is barely of direct interest to healthcare stakeholders unless potentially useful knowledge is extracted. The advancement of machine learning facilitates the generation of data-driven models to: improve the understanding of disease mechanisms, increase the efficiency in healthcare delivery, reduce overall cost to the healthcare systems and facilitate clinical decision support [1]. Whilst rapidly gaining recognition in the value of data analytics for healthcare, impediments to further adoption also remain, which relate to the black box nature of many machine learning algorithms. As healthcare applications especially in critical use cases usually come with high stakes, interpretable models are necessary to allow the end users to: interrogate, understand, debug and perhaps, improve the underlying machine learning systems employed [2], [3].
Clinical decision making, such as predicting a patient's likelihood of readmission to the hospital, can have an immediate effect on the well-being of the public. Healthcare presents unique challenges for the deployment of machine learning models where the demands for interpretability and performance in general are much higher as compared to most other domains [2]. Given that the cost of misclassification is potentially high, models that are able to express the inner philological associations in a human-readable way are widely sought in an effort to facilitate the interrogation and validation of learned knowledge. This would significantly help clinicians making informed decisions in combination with medical domain knowledge. Despite new models that exhibit high performance as well as interpretability have been proposed recently, the utility of these models in healthcare has not been convincingly demonstrated [2].
To avoid putting patients at risk, it is crucial that models trained on healthcare data be validated prior to deployment, as the pattern reflected from the training data may not necessarily be representative of the true inner workings of a certain medical condition. Rule-based systems are generally considered interpretable in the sense that the associated if-then statements are able to explicitly set out the conclusion under the given condition. In particular, fuzzy rule-based systems are of a natural appeal to the medical sectors. This is because they support the performance of approximate reasoning, through fuzzy logic, to track how a conclusion is reached, gaining insights into a potentially complex problem and therefore, facilitating the explanation of their solutions [4], [5], [6]. Built on top of fuzzy sets that permit gradual assessment of the membership of set elements, fuzzy systems also enable the tolerance of vagueness or imprecision that may result from linguistic descriptions such as ‘sever pain’ or ‘feel uncomfortable’ while enquiring medical symptoms or noise that may result from inaccurate testing results. Having recognised the potential of fuzzy techniques to cope with the challenges raising from healthcare, a number of accurate and interpretable fuzzy systems have been proposed in the literature, for various medical applications (e.g., [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]).
Following such promising research, and working towards providing assistance for clinical decision support, this paper proposes a neuro-fuzzy approach for the acquisition of accurate and interpretable fuzzy rule bases. It works by first discretising each of the continuous medical attributes into a certain number of categorical ones. In so doing, the original continuous data are mapped onto a new data set with only nominal values, enabling rapid generation of a set of crisp rules through the exploitation of advanced decision tree learning. The resulting crisp rules are able to reveal the basic relationship between attribute-value pairs, whereas the attribute-value pairs which do not appear in the rules can be removed. The generated crisp rules are then transformed to corresponding fuzzy rules with categorical values replaced by Gaussian membership functions. Finally, the set of fuzzy rules are adapted in the framework of adaptive network-based fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) [18] by the use of gradient descent and least square estimation. This leads to the acquisition of an optimal set of accurate fuzzy rules. An illustrative example is provided to explain the working mechanism of the proposed approach, whilst further systematical experiments demonstrate its superior performance over alternative fuzzy classifiers statistically.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 introduces the related work on the classification of popular medical problems using fuzzy systems. Section 3 describes the proposed methodology. Section 4 presents and discusses the experimental study. Section 5 concludes the paper and outlines ideas for further development.
