Art is immersive and virtual reality art may be especially so. Virtual reality (VR) provides a sense of presence fostered by a head-mounted display that situates the user in an immersive environment. VR has been lauded as a promising form of rehabilitation because of its ability to provide rich visual experiences and transferable skills Wilson et al. (1997), control over dynamic environments and measurements of responses Schultheis and Rizzo (2001), and the ability to present greater risks than would be possible in real life Standen and Brown (2005). While VR is heralded as a way to transcend social and physical boundaries, accessibility barriers continue to exist as basic assistive features such as auto-reading are absent Tefilo et al. (2016). Our work focuses on artists with disabilities from stroke as power users Kara et al. (1997) and lead users Von Hippel (1986) for VR art-making.
A stroke occurs when the blood supply to the brain is disrupted, resulting in brain damage and loss of ability. Stroke is the most common cause of adult disability worldwide What is stroke? (2017). Recovering from stroke requires sustained adherence to physical therapy that consists of dozens of repetitions of basic movements and tasks of daily life, such as reach and grasp, and which are perceived as tedious Bassett (2003). Lack of motivation for and adherence to therapy worsens therapeutic outcomes Maclean et al. (2000). Rehabilitation in VR meets some of these challenges because patients can perform their physical exercise while the immersion draws attention away from discomfort and pain Lohse et al. (2014); Thomson et al. (2014). VR can also be done at home and gesture activity and progress can be tracked. To be fully successful, a rehabilitation program for stroke must not only be effective and draw attention away from pain, but also be engaging and draw patients out of a state of grief Hackett et al. (2005). Immersive gaming is a burgeoning area which can engage patients in cognitive flow and continuous physical movement exploration Burke et al. (2010). VR game-based stroke interventions tend to focus on improving physical function or cognitive aspects. Depression and anxiety are common psychological disorders post-stroke, but these are neglected in current treatments Ali et al. (2014). We aim to begin to address this gap by better understanding current practices for therapeutic art-making and investigating design opportunities for VR art-based stroke rehabilitation.
Art therapy is an effective treatment for stroke Kongkasuwan et al. (2016). Art-therapists work with clients in art-making directed by therapeutic goals. Art therapy supports physical, cognitive and emotional healing through the creation of art including painting, drawing, sculpting, mixed media or other methods. The malleability and interaction possibilities of the materials are critical. Art-therapists’ expertise in materiality enables them to work with clients through the art-making process to transcend disabilities. Art-therapists overcome communication impairments by using “making” as expression  Lazar et al. (2018). Art-therapists also offer unobtrusive physical assistance to empower clients Lazar et al. (2016). To understand current therapeutic art-making practices and design opportunities for virtual art-making for stroke rehabilitation, we study the context of post-stroke art-making. We used VR art as a technology probe Hutchinson et al. (2003) within the context of an institution that offers art classes, open studio time and art therapy. Our work makes three contributions:
1.Empirical results from a field study of traditional art-making by 14 stroke survivors with disabilities. We found that these artists i) utilized the physical and temporally unfolding properties of the materials to create beauty without excessive fine motor precision, ii) used a social, situated and reflective process of tool selection, and iii) created work that blended inspirations and accomplishments from their previous and current identity.2.Themes derived from experiential VR interviews using a state of the art 3D tool as a technology probe. We found that the affordances of VR as a medium shifted making away from meditative, physically-supported fine motor activity to free-form mid-air gesture. The experience was immersive, physical and sometimes out of control. Creations were abstract, intentional or emergent.3.Implications for the design of VR art-making which have been identified from two types of research inquiry. The contrasts of the social, reflective and unhurried nature of traditional art-making and the unfolding of traditional materials, with the speed, proximity and finality of 3D paint lead us to recommend social, situated, reflective, physical and meaning-making considerations for VR art interaction.
