Linear search is an online problem in which a robot is tasked with finding an exit placed at an unknown location on an infinite line. It has long been known that the classic doubling strategy, which guarantees a search time of 9d for an exit at distance d from the initial location is optimal for a robot travelling at speed at most 1 (see any of the books [1], [2], [30] for additional variants, details and information). If even one more robot is allotted to the search then clearly an exit at distance d can always be found in time d by one of the robots. Therefore the problem of group search by multiple robots on the line is concerned with minimizing the time the last robot arrives at the exit; the problem is also called evacuation. It was first introduced as part of a study on cycle-search [11] and further elaborated on an infinite line for multiple communicating robots with crash [21] and Byzantine faults [19].
The time taken for group search on the line clearly depends on the communication capabilities of the robots. In the wireless communication model, the robots can communicate at any time and over any distance. In the face-to-face communication model, the robots can only communicate when they are in the same place at the same time. A straightforward algorithm achieves evacuation time 3d in the wireless model, and can be seen to be optimal, while it has been shown that in the face-to-face model, two robots cannot achieve better evacuation time than one robot [9].
In this paper, we consider the energy required for group search on the line. We use the energy model in which the energy consumption of a robot travelling a distance x at speed s is proportional to xs2. This model, also used in [12], is motivated by the concept of viscous drag in fluid dynamics; see Section 1.1 for more details. Let c be a chosen positive constant. Then, the authors of [12], studied the question of the minimum energy required for group search on the line by two robots performing under the face-to-face communication model and travelling at speed at most b while guaranteeing that both robots reach the exit within time cd, where d is the distance of the exit from the starting position of the robots. For the special case b=1,c=9, they proved the surprising result that two robots can evacuate with less energy than one robot, while taking the same evacuation time. Note that in the face-to-face model, where no information can be exchanged from distance, robots are bound to follow zig-zag trajectories effectively arranging for a sequence of possible meeting points in order to facilitate the efficient evacuation of their peers. In contrast, robots' trajectories we consider in this work, where robots perform in the wireless model, need only make one turn before they terminate. As a result, our model of energy that does not take into consideration any turning costs can be thought as more realistic in the wireless communication model than in the face-to-face communication model.
Our main approach throughout the paper is to investigate time-energy tradeoffs for group search by two robots in the wireless communication model. Assuming that the maximum speed is b, and the evacuation time is at most cd, where d is the distance of the exit from the origin, we study the problem of minimizing the total energy consumption of the robots. We also consider the problem of minimizing the evacuation time when the available energy is bounded by Δ.
1.1. Model and problem definitionsTwo robots are placed at the origin of an infinite line. An exit is located at unknown distance d from the origin and can be found if and only if a robot walks over it. A robot can change its direction or speed at any time, e.g., as a function of its distance from the origin, or the distance walked so far. Robots operate under the wireless model of communication in which messages can be transmitted between robots instantaneously at any distance. Feasible solutions are robots' trajectories in which, eventually, both robots evacuate, i.e. they both reach the exit. Given a location of the exit, the time by which the second robot reaches the exit is referred to as the evacuation time. We distinguish between constant-memory robots that can only travel at a constant number of hard-wired speeds, and unbounded-memory robots that can dynamically compute speeds and distances, and travel at any possible speed.The energy model being used throughout the paper is motivated from the concept of viscous drag in fluid dynamics [4]. In particular, an object moving with constant speed s will experience a drag force FD proportional2 to s2. In order to maintain the speed s over a distance x the object must do work equal to the product of FD and x resulting in a continuous energy loss proportional to the product of the object's squared speed and travel distance. For simplicity we take the proportionality constant to be one, and define the energy consumption moving at constant speed s over a segment of length x to be xs2. We extend the definition of energy for a robot moving in the same direction from point a to point b on the line, using speed s(x)∈R,x∈[a,b], as ∫abs2(x)dx. The total energy of a specific robot traversing more intervals, possibly in different directions, is defined as the sum of the energies used in each interval.Given a team of two robots, the total evacuation energy is defined as the sum of the robots' energies used till both robots evacuate. Similarly, we define the makespan evacuation energy as the maximum energy used by any of the two robots.For each d>0 there are two possible locations for the exit to be at distance d from the origin: we will refer to either of these as input instances d for the group search problem. More specifically, we are interested in the following three optimization problems:Definition 1.1Problem : Minimize the total evacuation energy, given that the evacuation time is no more than cd (for all instances d) and using speeds no more than b.Definition 1.2Problem : Minimize the evacuation time, given that the total evacuation energy is no more than Δ (for all instances d), and using speeds at most b.Definition 1.3Problem : Minimize the evacuation time, given that the makespan evacuation energy is no more than Δ (for all instances d), and using speeds at most b.For the last two problems, we consider two cases when the evacuation energy Δ is a constant and when it is linear in d.
1.2. Our resultsConsider the following intuitive and simple algorithm for wireless evacuation, which is a parametrized version of a well-known algorithm for the case of unit speed robots that achieve evacuation time 3d. Definition 1.4 Algorithm simple wireless search Ns,rRobots move at opposite directions with speed s until the exit is found. The finder announces “exit found” and halts. The other robot changes direction and moves at speed r until the exit is reached.We analyze the behaviour of this algorithm for all three proposed problems, and determine the speeds that achieve the minimum evacuation energy (or time) among all algorithms of this class, while respecting the given bound on evacuation time (resp. energy). In some cases, the algorithms derived are shown to be optimal. In particular, our main results are the following:1.We show that the problem  admits a solution if and only if cb≥3. Furthermore, for every c,b>0 with cb=3, we show that the optimal total evacuation energy is 4b2d, and this is achieved by Ns,r with s=r=b (Theorem 2.3).2.For every c,b>0 with cb≥3, we derive the optimal values of s and r for the algorithm Ns,r that minimize the total evacuation energy (Theorem 2.4).3.We observe that if total or makespan energy Δ is a constant, problems  and  cannot be solved by robots that can only use a finite number of speeds. We prove that if Δ is bounded by a constant, the optimal evacuation time is Ω(d3/2) (see Theorem 3.2). Somewhat surprisingly, we give an algorithm with evacuation time O(d3/2log⁡d) (see Theorem 3.3); thus the algorithm is optimal up to a logarithmic factor. Our algorithm requires the robots to continuously change their speed at every distance x from the origin. This is the only part that requires robots to have unbounded memory.4.For the problems  and  with total or makespan energy Δ=O(d) and b=1, we give upper bounds on the evacuation time (see Theorem 3.3, Theorem 5.1 respectively).
1.3. Related workIn group search, a set of communicating robots interact and co-operate by exchanging information in order to complete the task which usually involves finding an exit placed at an unknown location within a given search domain. Some of the pioneering results related to our work are concerned with search on an infinite domain, like a straight line [3], [5], [6], [29], while others with search on the perimeter of a closed domain like unit disk [11] or equilateral triangle or square [23]. The communication model being used may be either wireless [11] or face-to-face [8], [20], [23]. Search and evacuation problems with a combinatorial flavour have been recently considered in [14], [15] and search-and-fetch problems in [25], [26], while [10] studied average-case/worst-case trade-offs for a specific evacuation problem on the disk. The interested reader may also wish to consult a recent survey paper [18] on selected search and evacuation topics.Traditional approaches to evaluating the performance of search have been mostly concerned with time. This is apparent in the book [2] and the research described in the seminal works on deterministic [3], stochastic [5], [6] and randomized [29] search and continued up to the most recent research papers on linear search, for robots with terrain dependent speeds [22], robots with faults [27] in particular Byzantine [19] or crash-fault behaviour [21], robots with probabilistic faults [7], and in group search problems with distinguished searchers, such as in [28] for linear search, or [16], [17] for searching the unit disk (see also the survey paper [18]). Aside from the research by [24], in which the authors are looking at the turn cost when robots change direction during the search, little or no research has been conducted on other measures of performance.[12] was the first paper on search and evacuation that changed the focus from optimizing the time to (a) minimizing the energy consumption required to find the exit and (b) to time/energy tradeoffs. The authors determine optimal (and in some cases nearly optimal) linear search algorithms inducing the lowest possible energy consumption and also propose a linear search algorithm that simultaneously achieves search time 9d and consumes energy 8.42588d, for an exit located at distance d unknown to the robots. However, this differs from our present work in that the authors focus exclusively on the face-to-face communication model while here we focus on the wireless model. In the present paper, we extend the results of [12] to the realm of the wireless communication model and study time/energy trade-offs for evacuating two robots on the infinite line. Despite their apparent similarities, the face-to-face and wireless communication models require completely different approaches to the design of efficient linear search algorithms.
