Cyber–Physical Systems (CPS) are networked systems consisting of embedded physical components, such as sensors and actuators, and computational components, such as controllers. Recently, CPS have been successfully utilized in large-scale applications, including power network control, industrial manufacturing processes, and traffic control. However, the growing complexity of CPS and the frequent communication between components make them vulnerable to malicious attacks. Such attacks often manipulate the state of the system by injecting faulty data through compromised sensors, leading to undesirable feedback control signals. Recently, cyber-attacks have been responsible for some incidents of safety-critical automobiles (Greenberg, 2015, Koscher et al., 2010, Shoukry et al., 2013) and UAVs (Javaid, Jahan, & Sun, 2017), and even worse, catastrophic losses of large-scale systems (Chen and Abu-Nimeh, 2011, Slay and Miller, 2007). Therefore, developing attack-resilient methods for secure state estimation in CPS has recently gained significant attention (Cardenas et al., 2008, Lee, 2008).
In this paper, we consider CPS modeled as linear time-invariant systems, where a subset of sensors is subject to malicious attacks represented as attack vectors added to themeasurements. Our goal is to detect the attacked sensors fast and use the attack-free sensors to accurately estimate the state. In this context, secure state estimation is closely related to robust control (Manandhar et al., 2014, Pasqualetti et al., 2011), where the control design is subject to process and measurement noise, modeled as an unknown disturbance that is bounded or follows some probability distribution. Nevertheless, such assumptions on the noise restrict the general application of robust control methods for secure state estimation, since it is difficult to predict the attack strategy. Similarly, fault tolerant control methods (Blanke et al., 2006, Teixeira et al., 2015) focus on internal faults with known failure modes and statistical properties, rather than adversarial attacks. Secure state estimation under specific attack signals has been investigated in Hendrickx et al., 2014, Miao et al., 2013, Mo, Chabukswar et al., 2014, Mo, Hespanhaet al., 2014, Sundaram et al., 2010, Teixeira et al., 2010 and Teixeira, Pérez, Sandberg, and Johansson (2012).
Compared to the literature discussed above, we do not impose any assumptions on the type of the attack signal. We assume that the number of attacked sensors is smaller than an upper bound, which is necessary to ensure observability of the attacked system that is needed to reconstruct the state. Under this assumption, we propose a new optimal graph search-based algorithm to correctly identify malicious attacks even in large-scale CPS and securely estimate their state, when the power of attack signals exceeds a certain threshold. The graph consists of layers, each one containing two nodes capturing a truth assignment of any given sensor, and directed edges connecting adjacent layers only. Then, our algorithm searches the layers of this graph incrementally, favoring directions with more attack-free assignments and higher layer, while actively managing a repository of nodes whose expansion are intentionally delayed. The combination of search bias, intentionally delayed expansion and the ability to self-correct allow our graph-search algorithm to reach the optimal assignment fast and tackle larger problems. Assuming that process and measurement noise does not dominate the attack signal, we show that our algorithm is complete and optimal meaning that it will find a feasible attack assignment, if one exists, which does not incorrectly identify any attack-free sensor as attacked. Finally, numerical simulations show that our method outperforms existing algorithms both in terms of optimality and execution time.
Most closely related to the work proposed here are the methods in Chong et al., 2015, Fawzi et al., 2014, Mishra et al., 2017, Pajic et al., 2017, Pajic et al., 2015, Pajic et al., 2014, Shoukry et al., 2017 and Shoukry et al. (2018), which exploit the measurement within a finite-length time window to conduct state estimation. Specifically, Fawzi et al. (2014) consider discrete-time LTI systems without noise and provides necessary and sufficient conditions under which the state of the system can be reconstructed when a subset of the sensors are under attack. The idea is to formulate the secure state estimation problem as an ℓ0 minimization problem that is computationally expensive, and then relax it into an ℓ1∕ℓr problem that can be efficiently solved using convex optimization, which mitigates the combinatorial complexity of the methods in Lee et al., 2015, Pasqualetti et al., 2013 and Yong, Zhu, and Frazzoli (2015). However, ℓ0 and ℓ1∕ℓr optimization are not always equivalent, thus their relaxation can result in incorrect estimates. The work in Pajic et al. (2014) extends this method to LTI systems where process and measurement noises are considered in the presence of malicious attacks, and formulates the ℓ0 optimization problem as a mixed integer linear program (MILP). However, solving MILPs is NP-hard, so this method cannot be used for very large problems. Analytic bounds on the state-estimation error for the proposed ℓ0 state estimator and its convex ℓ1 relaxation in the presence of noise are derived in Pajic et al., 2017, Pajic et al., 2015, where it is shown that using relaxation results in inaccurate estimation. The work in Chong et al. (2015) provides similar necessary and sufficient conditions for continuous-time LTI systems, and proposes two methods to estimate the state involving the observability Gramian and the Luenberger observer. However, both methods are computationally expensive. An alternative approach based on Satisfiability Modulo Theory (SMT) is proposed in Mishra et al., 2017, Shoukry et al., 2018, Shoukry et al., 2017, that formulates the secure state estimation problem as a satisfiability problem subject to Boolean constraints and convex constraints over real state variables. The proposed iterative algorithm combines SMT solvers to obtain a possible attack assignment for the sensors with convex optimization methods to check whether this assignment is valid given the dynamical system equations. Due to the formulation as a feasibility problem, the solution is not guaranteed to be optimal even in the absence of process and measurement noise. Compared to the literature discussed above, our graph-search method is provably optimal, meaning it identifies the true attack assignment and does not incorrectly identify attack-free sensors as attacked. Moreover, numerical experiments show that our method compares favorably to existing methods in terms of execution time. This is due to the proposed search bias that favors directions at higher layers with more attack-free assignments and the ability of our algorithm to self-correct by managing a repository of nodes that can be expanded at later iterations if needed.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the problem formulation. In Section 3, we present the proposed graph-search algorithm for secure state estimation, and examine its completeness, optimality, and complexity in Section 4. Finally, comparative numerical simulations are shown in Section 5, while Section 6 concludes the paper.
