Sustainability has grown into a key concept in both scientific research and policy agendas. Academic publications on sustainability and sustainable development feature as much as 292.230 occurrences in the Web of Science (WoS) database alone, coming from 15.737 different journals and more than 100.000 individual authors.1 Likewise, several international agreements −such as the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change− have emerged as expressions of a growing commitment to sustainability goals at the national and transnational levels, and on a myriad of different topics.
One particularly crucial theme has been the design and setup of governance mechanisms to effectively achieve sustainability, acknowledging its complex and controversial nature (Farrell et al., 2005; Jordan, 2008). This subfield of research has developed particularly since the 1990s, when sustainability arose as a full-fledged field of proactive planning (Spindler, 2013) or “Earth politics” (Von Weizsäcker, 1994). However, governance and sustainability -and even more evidently, sustainable development-have shared an implicit relationship from the outset, in that the latter has always implied a significant degree of purposive steering (Voβ et al., 2007), that is, of ‘governing’ in a broad sense (Kooiman, 2003).
Specific understandings of steered social change, governing, and distribution of power have been deeply intertwined in the historical roots of modern environmental concepts and in the particular ideological disputes leading to the current apogee of sustainability semantics as well (Radkau, 2014, 2007). As argued by Grober (2012), the notion of gubernatio (Latin precursor of the modern ‘governance’) was an essential part of the philosophical-theological heritage that the original concept of sustainability recovered from the Middle Ages. Subsequently, ‘governing’ played an essential role within both conservationism and the ‘sustainable yield’ doctrine, key precursors of modern sustainability (Caradonna, 2014). Likewise, the need to ‘govern’ the relationship between society and environment recurred as central tenet in many of the pioneering publications, placing environmental concerns in the global agenda since the 1960s and 1970s, such as Buckminster Fuller’s idea of “operating spaceship Earth” (Fuller, 1963).
Even as a research subject, sustainability has been characterized as an object of knowledge and of social action (Jetzkowitz, 2019), bringing forth particular forms of describing and planning the world while foreclosing others. Conversely, the very act of conceptualizing sustainability (and governance) has been depicted as akin to a work of translation between different “social worlds” (Callon et al., 2009; Latour, 1987). According to this interpretation, concepts such as sustainability and governance would be best seen as semantic webs, condensing a heterogeneous array of meanings and maintaining symbolically connected the specific socio-historical contexts in which these meanings have evolved (Ophir, 2016a, 2016b). The communicative ‘performance’ (Austin, 1962) of these concepts depend precisely on their ability to inhabit and connect heterogeneous social contexts, mobilizing and translating a variety of different interests and meanings across diverse scientific, political, and economic fields.
To date, however, few research efforts illuminate the latent meanings and communicative performance linked to the intersection between sustainability and governance. Intended as a contribution to conceptualizing2 the relationship between the notions of sustainability and governance, this study aims at: 1) identifying the meanings and interests that are mobilized when the two terms of sustainability and governance intersect within academic communication; and 2) observing semantic structures that allow for the sustainability-governance intersection (SG in the following) to translate meanings between different academic communities. To that aim, it employs computational tools to process a large corpus of academic literature on SG (1992–2017), covering a significant portion of the scholarly discussion on the matter.
The main argument advanced in this paper is that the relative ambiguity of these concepts, far from limiting their scientific power, allows them to act as the unity of differences between several scientific fields, articulating distinct methodological and theoretical perspectives within a shared set of value commitments -the promotion of a sustainable future. The findings confirm this hypothesis: the corpus of literature analysed hereafter encompasses objects and concepts in fields as dissimilar as studies on climate change and on environmental property rights, as heterogeneous as community empowerment and corporate certification schemes, and as complementary as urban planning and the management of water resources. In each case, SG assumes different meanings, responding to specific uses and interests. However, across these different uses and meanings, a recognizable semantic structure can be outlined, combining heterogeneity (of different topics and governance layers) with corresponding levels of coherence (the quest for sustainability in a broad sense). Within this structure, in turn, four distinct semantic constellations of SG may be distinguished.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews previous bibliometric studies on sustainability. Section 3 describes data and methods. Section 4 presents the results, particularly describing the four semantic constellations of SG singled out through the analysis. Section 5 discusses the main findings about semantic structures in the SG literature. Finally, section 6 summarizes the main conclusions.
