Blended learning (b-learning) is a method of teaching approach that combines online learning with traditional in face-to-face classroom methods. In research literature [1]. the terms blended learning, hybrid learning and mixed-mode instruction are often used to refer b-learning. Its main goal is to overcome the drawbacks of pure online learning and it remains a priority issue in technology enhaced education despite having been put into practice on all over the word for 20 years ago. Nowadays, in the current pandemic scenario, blended instruction has become more important since it is going to be the new normal in terms of teaching-learning in higher education. COVID-19 has led to the sudden suspension of teaching activities in many countries and the scramble to find new ways to resume classes with restrictive space and hygiene requirements. Many institutions do not have enough space to implement the necessary measures and are forced to rethink their face-to-face learning plans as blended learning plans.
Rapid advances in technology have let us capture all student actions in their interactions with virtual and traditional learning environments. Blended learning environments gather a huge amount of data about students’ multimodal interactions in traditional classrooms and on-line environments from a wide range of data sources [2]. So, these data sources need to be fused and mined to shed light on educational issues such as prediction of student performance. In this line, Educational data mining (EDM) [3] can be applied to discover and improve educational processes from information extracted from educational data, which is then used to understand the educational process [4]. EDM has been widely used to improve and enhance learning quality, as well as in the pursuit of research objective to understand the teaching-learning process [5]. In this line, one of the most frequent and the oldest studied tasks/problems in EDM is the prediction of learners’ performance. It is still a challenge to predict student learning achievement in blended learning environments combining online and offline learning [6] making data fusion techniques necessary.
In this study we do a classification task for predicting the value of a categorical/nominal attribute (the class or final academic status of the student: Pass, Fail or Drop out) based on other attributes (the predictive attributes from various available data sources). We propose applying different data fusion approaches and classification algorithms to data gathered from several sources (theory classes, practical sessions, online sessions and final exams) in a blended university course in order to predict the students’ final academic performance. The research questions posed by this study are:
Question 1.- Which data fusion approach and classification algorithms produce the best results from our data?Question 2.- How useful are the prediction models we produce to help teachers detect students who are at risk of drop out or fail the course?
This paper is organized as follows. The first section covers the background of the related research areas. Following that, we describe the proposed methodology, and describe the data used and how it was preprocessed. Next, we describe the experiments we performed and the results they produced. Finally, we discuss the implications, conclusions and future research.
