Simulation-based optimization (SO or SBO) refers to, without loss of generality, the minimization of an objective function subject to a set of constraints, both of which are evaluated through stochastic simulations (Amaran et al., 2016). In transportation network design problems (NDPs), SBO is frequently applied whenever a “black-box” simulation model is present. Obtaining an analytical solution is impossible due to the lack of an explicit mathematical formulation of the traffic system in question, and so are any commonly used numerical solutions that require knowledge of the gradient or Hessian. Even when traffic dynamics is described by a mathematical model, e.g. a system of deterministic differential algebraic equations,1 rather than through a stochastic “black-box” simulator, one may still find it too difficult to calculate the gradient or Hessian and thus, derivative-free optimization (deterministic version of SBO) holds as a competitive solution (see Cheng et al., 2019b, Zheng and Geroliminis, 2016).
This paper proposes two toll level problems (TLPs) with different levels of complexity using the macroscopic or network fundamental diagram (MFD or NFD). A large-scale simulation-based dynamic traffic assignment (SBDTA) model of Melbourne, Australia is used, which was previously calibrated and validated (Shafiei et al., 2018). We review, apply, and compare four state-of-the-art SBO methods as the solution algorithms to the TLPs, including the proportional-integral (PI) controller, regressing kriging (RK), DIviding RECTangles (DIRECT), and simultaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA). Among the four methods, RK and SPSA are intrinsically capable of dealing with simulation stochasticity, as is present in the SBDTA model. The PI controller and DIRECT are, in contrast, deterministic methods that belong to derivative-free optimization; but with the help of sample-path optimization, they can also be applied to stochastic problems (Amaran et al., 2016). By performing computational experiments and quantitative comparison of these methods on a large-scale real urban network, which have not been explored in any previous studies, we offer new insights into better understanding, choosing, and implementing SBO when applied to solve toll pricing problems.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides an overview of SBO and TLPs. Section 3 introduces the SBDTA model of Melbourne, Australia, based on which two TLPs are proposed. Section 4 details the four methods, which are applied and compared in Section 5. Section 6 concludes the paper.
