Culture, the persistent importance of the development of the driver, creative economy, more and more income generation, is job creation, export revenue, has been recognized worldwide. Therefore, because of the cultural, this symbiotic relationship between the creative industries, in the present study, design-driven innovation will explore whether it can play a leading role in achieving the sustainable development goals of the regional economy. Cultural insight has become an integral part of innovative products and services. Creativity, or create production, to the new one is present, through the imagination skills, to invest in a new form, bring to exist, is the ability or power to create. The environmental front, it means that foster creativity in a particular environment to suppress it. Despite the global environment today has made it clear to encourage innovation, there are different regions, significant differences between different enterprises. Method "to solve technical problems", the system uses technology research objectives in line with the principles of technical systems evolution.
A few analysts accept that the laws and rules/standards may prompt human innovativeness and advancement strategies and cycles of comprehension. As of late, in an exceptionally serious universe of business, the appearance of the period of globalization and the ascent of the information economy has been advancing the improvement of innovative enterprises. Many new Economy, Trade, and Industry, it is possible in the country, to convert a wide variety of cultural heritage, cultural, ethnic, and re-development of the urban ecology and industrial resources.
The cultural and creative industries, media, film, and related animation, create new historical heritage, art, and culture and need new opportunities to promote economic growth. In the creative industry, it is a type of culture, invention, and industry. It is a collection of two basic elements (core spirit and surrounding objects). It is not easy to understand the spirit of the core. There are around the object is too frequently. Such as many scenic spots, in many of the souvenirs are sold in the sign of the beautiful scenery. Based on the national and cultural heritage, comfort, and modern design to create resonance and cultural habits, most of the recognition, the spirit of their culture. At present, much innovative design of cultural products is the same, such as hand soap, handmade cloth, T-shirts, key rings, tie, or tie clips, pastries, tea, and local dishes. Building culture is interested in creative product design, and some scholars and the corporate account have achieved certain results. For example, some of the soap on the market and add creativity design.
Phalaenopsis mixture orchids were prepared by extracting the alcohol component and Phalaenopsis. Knowledge has laid a solid foundation, for it is an important attribute of innovation. If you have your knowledge and experience, it will be dependant only on designers' creativity is prohibited. Nevertheless, the only knowledge people will never create. Einstein said: "Imagination is the imagination that is limited; it is important knowledge than the knowledge surrounds the whole world. That the source of the creation of this means is the imagination "imagination to create a production.
Thinking style is the most important attribute of creativity. Upon reaching the required capacity, creative ability, special talents, and wisdom of the people, it does not depend on his thinking. Creative thinking is the creativity of the backbone. While solving the current problem, the premise of creativity to follow the style of inertia thinking is not to seek a new way to overthrow a consistent way of thinking. In response to changes in the creative industries, consumer demand and market positioning, style, and cultural products respond to changes in the creative industries. Innovative products with the cultural characteristics of the areas where design is carried outrun its own ability, emotion, the people's heart in the products designed to meet the global marketing strategy, and other attractive products product highlighted the. According to the innovation and worldwide market five product samples product, local characteristics are selected from the three directions, the product of this trans-orientated product. Typical representative categories are selected. Exhibition" salt and pepper group, "steamer set" steamer, and three press Cup. All of the "Mandarin" is characteristic of the region, innovation, and global market elements of the product it has, but to varying degrees.
