The use of scientific knowledge in policymaking has been a subject of debate in the environmental sector. Although evidence-based policymaking has been advocated over the last twenty years, the idea has not yet been fully diffused. Several specific challenges have been faced when implementing evidence into policies in the environmental area, such as the numerous types of evidence in environmental science; ethical and practical difficulties involved in producing evidence; uncertainty and reliability of the evidence itself; the interaction of environmental challenges with those in other policy areas; and the fact that problem-solving methods often require a global effort that goes beyond the jurisdiction of policymakers (Cairney, 2016; Cairney and Oliver, 2017; Reed and Meagher, 2019). These difficulties suggest that improving policy implementation of evidence is a serious challenge for both scientists and policymakers. To date, various aspects of evidence and policymaking within the environmental sector have been studied such as a new transparent process for incorporating research evidence into policy decisions (Dicks et al., 2014); a systematic climate policy evaluation (Haug et al., 2010); a participatory and inclusive structures for policymaking (Lalor and Hickey, 2014); social interactions, socio-political environments, and power relations in the knowledge production and its use (Crona and Parker, 2012); accessibility of research to policy processes (Stringer and Dougill, 2013); and metrics of policy success (Clare and Creed, 2014). Most of these studies describe the barriers to the production, communication, and use of evidence. Most of these studies can surely provide suggestive insights for a better description of the barriers to the production, communication, and use of evidence.
However, there has not been much interest in the attempt to systematically develop the perspectives that scientists and policymakers, who are the main players in Evidence-based Policymaking (EBPM), should take into account in order to overcome evidence barriers in their policymaking. The implementation of evidence in policymaking requires a greater focus on the interaction between science and politics at each stage of the sequence of processes for producing, communicating, and using evidence. Indeed, while experts and policymakers build relationships through evidence in numerous ways, their intentions often conflict with one another. Experts can engage in different advocacy practices depending on their level of consideration for the policy context and their commitment to normative judgment (Pielke, 2007). However, evidence can be used in various ways. For instance, policymakers can use evidence as a tool for problem-solving or as a strategic means of empowering policymakers and parties to promote a particular policy option. Evidence can also be used symbolically to enhance the reputation of an organization, even if this means disregarding the decision-making context (Schrefler, 2014). Evidence can be also ignored or misinterpreted amid conflicts over political values and ideologies, or due to administrative constraints (Strassheim and Kettunen, 2014).
This prompts the question: what conditions are necessary for establishing an appropriate, evidence-mediated relationship between experts and policymakers? Public policy research has begun investigating the importance of considering the use of evidence from a broad perspective. In two seminal papers, Cash et al. (2002, 2003) presented credibility, relevance, and legitimacy (CRELE)—a set of criteria for describing the effective use of knowledge in policymaking. The primary challenge in current CRELE research is in developing more sophisticated attributes of evidence and examining the usability of its knowledge system (Dunn and Laing, 2017; Kunseler et al., 2015; Parkhurst, 2017; Sarkki et al., 2015; van der Hel and Biermann, 2017v; van Voorn et al., 2016v). However, Tangney (2017) noted that little attention has been paid to how such a knowledge framework can help direct interactions in the science-political interface.
The purpose of this paper is to establish a reference framework that enables scientists and policymakers to align their sights to deal with evidence in policy making. The framework in this study intends to enhance our understanding of the interaction between science and politics in the phases of production and use of evidence, thereby enabling the identification of the areas requiring greater attention in the implementation of EBPM in environmental issues. In doing so, it is necessary to consider the context in which the knowledge framework is being adapted. How evidence is used in policymaking varies widely depending on the progress of this relationship. As it is at a phase in which environmental issues are only just being recognized, an academically appropriate approach has not yet been established. On the other hand, policy issues have been recursively identified within the evidence evaluation system at a stage in which academic understanding has been established. Therefore, it makes no sense to evaluate the operation of evidence according to the same criteria in both cases during different stages, and this point has been overlooked in previous studies. The aim of this study is to identify perspectives toward assessing the operation of evidence in the scientific and political realms as well as the scientific/political boundaries therein by examining the nature of evidence and the sociopolitical aspects of knowledge use in environmental research.
This paper is structured as follows. Section 2 examines the five perspectives toward assessing evidence in the scientific and political domains, namely: (1) methodological rigorousness; (2) consistency; (3) proximity; (4) social appropriateness; and (5) legitimacy. In doing so, this section provides a more comprehensive view of EBPM for environmental issues. Section 3 categorizes science-policy interaction into three phases: (1) a pre-institutionalization phase, in which the academic and social framing of an issue was unclear; (2) a mid-institutionalization phase, in which the academic and social framing of an issue was established and institutionalization was advanced; and (3) a post-institutionalization phase, in which issues were recursively defined within the evidence evaluation system itself. Section 4 establishes a reference framework for the comprehensive evaluation of evidence. Section 5 examines, through a case study on mercury pollution, how the framework provides specific guidance that appropriately promotes evidence-based policy and practice.
