The fluctuating traffic scenarios are commonly evolving in optical transport network (Yin et al., 2019). This is caused by the deployment of content-oriented applications created by Software Defined Networks (SDNs) like google, Microsoft, Baidu, and Facebook (Nag et al., 2011). These applications have generated fluctuating data traffic by attracting many users with different internet needs. The potential threats of the exponential growth of the fluctuating traffic has led to extensive research to increase the capacity, and improve efficiency of the currently deployed Wavelength-Division Multiplexing (WDM) systems. The currently prevailing enhancements in WDM networks do not provide many options for network resilience and tolerance in the phase of high fluctuating flow rates. This is because of its rigid, and coarse arrangement, which limits resource allocation to a certain bound (Yang, 2020). This kind of behavior may not quantify resource allocation based on transmission reach. As a result, it presents no guarantees for resource utilization, and manageable operational costs. This has limited seamless flow of data traffic in SDN data centers.
In order to address the above challenges, the recent research advancements have presented many solutions on Elastic Optical Networks (EONs) with many enhancements to guarantee Network serviceability (Chand Chatterjee et al., 2015). But the capacity limit of the single mode core may soon be overwhelmed by large volumes of the exponential growth of fluctuating traffic. As a result, Space Division Multiplexing (SDM-EONs) was adopted with the use of MCFs to switch multiple parallel cores to transit large volumes of traffic (Fujii et al., 2017).
The proposed SDM-EONs implement the technique of Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM). OFDM allocates spectrum resources flexibly during the resource allocation (Xu and Kim, 2017). In OFDM, the optical signals are transmitted over spectrum segments with fine granularity (Fan et al., 2015). These increases the chance of utilizing the available spectrum resources efficiently. However, due to core-switching, the flexibility of allocating resources in MCF-SDM-EONs presents XT constraints. The XT constraint is caused by overlapping signals from active adjacent cores (Oliveira and da Fonseca, 2017). The XT constraint can become very serious, during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic flow rates (Klinkowski and Zalewski, 2019). The detrimental impact of XT may disrupt traffic flow due to signal impairment, raising the risk levels of spectrum fragmentation, which consumes much more spectrum resources, during resource allocation (Yang et al., 2018).
Moreover, fluctuating traffic rates have a very high demand for bandwidth comparatively with stable traffic, and sometimes exceeds the amount of bandwidth required by peak traffic (Zhong et al., 2019). If the spectrum fragmentation rate increases, due to the impact of XT, the cost-effective spectrum allocation becomes difficult to achieve, if fluctuating traffic flow scenarios are projected based on 24-h dimension. This is because the fluctuating traffic rates occur due to the growing diversity of user demands over time. They are usually experienced daily, during different hours of the day. In this case study, the day time traffic is from 6:00AM to 18:00PM, and the night time traffic is from 18:00PM to 06:00AM. These complicates the RMSCA process, during the peak load of fluctuating traffic.
Despite the efficacy of SDM-EONs to accommodate larger volumes of traffic during RMSCA, SDM EONs are vulnerable to link failures. It's estimated in every operational optical transport network, a failure occurs every 4 h. With the RMSCA overwhelmed by exponential traffic flow rates (Zhu et al., 2020a), a link failure can cause spectrum fragmentation. This increases disruption of seamless signal transmission in the optical transport network. In order to maintain reliable resource allocation, p-cycle protection is applied to protect not more than one path during the peak load of the fluctuating traffic (Oliveira and da Fonseca, 2019a).
Furthermore, expanding transmission capacity rates requires MCF-SDM-EONs to aggregate multiple cores to cope with the growing traffic demands, during peak load (Rottondiet al., 2019). As a result, the concept of core allocation is key to the success of MCF. This is due to the dynamic effects of XT generated by optical signals propagating through adjacent cores (Yang et al., 2019). In order to minimize spectrum overlapping of adjacent cores. The TICA policy divides the MCF into two: prioritized cores, and non-prioritized cores. The policy first allocates traffic to the spectrum resources in the prioritized cores. The occupied spectrum resources in the prioritized cores are used to determine the required resources to be allocated in the non-prioritized cores. In comparison, the core prioritization in (Fujii et al., 2014a) allocates spectrum resources based on the cycle of prioritized cores. The potential threat of XT is very high, and the detrimental impact of XT increases with the accumulation of incoming traffic in the cores (epak Sharma and Kummar, 2017). As a result, the looming risks of fragmentation due to XT is high (Takagi et al., 2011). Conversely, TICA policy enhances the core prioritization scheme by implementing spectrum compactness (SC) to reinforce load balancing, during peak load of the fluctuating traffic. TICA policy allocates resources on non-prioritized cores using threshold determined by the SC of the prioritized cores. The objective is to provide enough service time required by the out-going traffic in the prioritized cores before the incoming traffic accumulates in the non-prioritized cores. This can alleviate the detrimental impact of XT over long haul transmission, during peak load of fluctuating traffic (Klinkowski et al., 2018).
In this paper, we relay solutions to enhance networks that are prone to the issues of the peak load of the fluctuating traffic. First, we propose a Fluctuating Traffic Model (FTM) to formulate characteristics that describe fluctuating time-varying traffic flow rates. Secondly, we introduce a protected Routing, Modulation, Spectrum, and Core Allocation (RMSCA) algorithm called Traffic Awareness Cross-talk Interference Avoidance (TACIA-RMSCA). TACIA-RMSCA embraces the Triangular Iterative Core Assignment (TICA) strategy to overcome the impact of XT. Last but not least, we simulate experimental results to evaluate the proposed framework. The performance of the two heuristic algorithms is evaluated with the benchmark algorithm (GAK-RMSCA). The experimental results show that TACIA-RMSCA registered a significant performance than GAK-RMSCA.
1.1. ContributionIn this paper, we propose a protected TACIA-RMSCA, which implements TICA policy to solve RMSCA challenges in MCF-SDM-EON, during peak load of fluctuating traffic. During resource allocation, TACIA-RMSCA is supported by a P-Cycle protection scheme to minimize the disruption of seamless traffic flow, in case of single link failure. In summary, the contributions of this paper are:•Formulating TICA policy to allocate spectrum resources, in order to minimize the detrimental impact of XT, during peak load of fluctuating traffic.•Spectrum assignment constraint to minimize spectrum overlapping, and support P-cycle protection scheme, during RMSCA.•Efficient utilization of spectrum resources, during peak load of fluctuating traffic.•Introducing efficient heuristic algorithms, that can be implemented in large scale scenarios of data transmission in Optical transport networks.•Evaluation and comparison of the proposed strategies with existing solutions based on simulation experiment.The proceeding remaining sections of this paper is presented as follows: Section II discusses the related work. Section III introduces the proposed solution. Section IV presents statistical evaluations of experimental results by simulation. Section V discusses, and analyses the experimental results Section.VI concludes the research.
