The significance of agri-food authenticity and supply chain transparency has been recognised with consumers demanding safe products and high-quality information (Verbeke, 2005). Agri-food firms often build consumer trust in their supply chains from either communicating trustworthiness with industry stakeholders, regulatory institutions and civil society organisations (Kendall et al., 2019b) or engaging in quality certification, packaging and labelling to offer more credence attributes, such as product origin and production specialities (Kendall et al., 2019b). However, these authenticity approaches do not protect consumers from food fraud, because institutional trust is easily challenged or disrupted by food fraud incidents (Kendall et al., 2019a). Furthermore, product and information quality cannot be guaranteed with individual agri-food firms implementing national and international regulations, particularly in global agriculture and food systems, which involve multiple firms and have increased the distance from farm to fork (Behnke and Janssen, 2020).
China is a country with frequent food fraud incidents (Kendall et al., 2019a). Accordingly, there is a higher risk of counterfeit Australian beef products in the market. PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) notes that half of beef sold in China under the Australian label is not Australian beef (Adams, 2019). With an increased awareness of food fraud, more Chinese consumers buying Australian meat products are searching for attributes that indicate authenticity (Condon, 2018). However, they often cannot identify the country of origin and the product’s quality. In response, trusted supply chains from Australian producers to Chinese consumers need to be configured more effectively than just complying with already stringent import regulations. As Australian agricultural and beef supply chain actors individually and collectively face the challenge of providing chain-wide assurance (Economist Intelligence Unit, 2008), this requires shared responsibilities amongst agricultural and supply chain actors and the use of tracking and tracing technologies.
Blockchain is a decentralised network of computers that share the same database entries updated by a consensus mechanism (Biggs et al., 2017). With blockchain bringing a common technological language to agricultural supply chains (Galvez, et al., 2018), it promises to solve key problems in agriculture, including in animal and livestock farming and associated supply chain management. Specifically, it has the potential to take supply chain visibility and trust to a higher level (Foth, 2017), and strengthen consumer trust based on credentialed traceability. This blockchain-enabled transformation begs the question of trust perceptions amongst consumers towards blockchain solutions. Another question arises, with many supply chain processes being automated with new technologies (Creydt and Fischer, 2019), about what activities still require human interventions. Our study is motivated by identifying how both agricultural stakeholders and consumers value blockchain solutions, and how to reconcile human and machine intelligence (Frederico, 2020) in blockchain-enabled information systems for trust strength in the agriculture and food supply chains.
These motivations suggest two research questions that we will address in this paper:
1.How much do Chinese consumers value our blockchain prototype particularly in delivering trust awareness in Australian beef products?2.How human and machine intelligence be reconciled to explicitly link the responsibility of all chain actors for trust strength in supply chains?
A design science approach was adopted (see Section 3.1) to address these two research questions. To answer the first question, an exploratory, qualitative methodology comprising focus groups was used to empirically investigate consumer feedback on our initial blockchain prototype and to find new ways to strengthen consumer trust. The second research question focusses on the human-machine reconcile design on a blockchain ecosystem that enables agricultural supply chain actors to take shared responsibility for a more trustworthy cross-border beef supply chain.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews relevant literature. Section 3 describes our methodology. Our study’s findings are presented in section 4 and discussed in section 5 including the study’s contributions, implications, limitations, and next steps. Section 6 concludes the paper.
