Sheth et al. (2002), in their work on the “calc-alkaline series” nomenclature of igneous rocks, reproduced, from Anderson (1999), this quote of Abbé de Condillac “… we cannot improve the language of any science without at the same time improving the science itself; neither can we, on the other hand, improve a science, without improving the language or nomenclature which belongs to it. – Abbé de Condillac”.
Similar statements can be traced throughout the human history. Thus, the nomenclature in any science is of fundamental importance not only for efficient human communication but also for identifying or quantifying unusual time- or space-related changes, such as in environmental science or mining research. The water research is, of course, no exception.
There have been many attempts to propose a nomenclature scheme for water and to present relevant computer programs (e.g., Chadha, 1999; Romani, 1981; Lee, 1998; Rao, 1998; Güler et al., 2002; Ahmad et al., 2003; Ray and Mukherjee, 2008; Giménez-Forcada, 2010; Elhag, 2016; Teng et al., 2016; Pérez-Espinosa et al., 2019), although the Hill-Piper diagram (Hill, 1940; Piper, 1944) still constitutes the most frequently used nomenclature with over 3800 citations according to Google Scholar (accessed on 13th February 2020). At several occasions (e.g., Xue et al., 2019), the “famous” diagram is simply cited as the Piper diagram, without even providing the relevant reference.
The Hill-Piper classification is based mainly on two ternary diagrams constructed from cations and anions normalized concentration data in mg/L (Ca-Mg-(Na + K) for cations; and SO4-Cl-(HCO3 + CO3) for anions) and a related diamond field, which could provide the nomenclature of only 5 water types. Durov (1948) used a rectangular field, instead of a diamond field. A modified Hill-Piper diagram, capable of providing irrigation water classification, was proposed by Handa (1965) by incorporating salinity in the chemical variables. Romani (1981) proposed a modification of the Hill-Piper ternary diagrams (equilateral triangles) in terms of right-angled isosceles triangles, stating that this change represented an advantage in that the resulting central field becomes a square instead of a diamond. Another modification of the Hill-Piper diagrams consisted of the Banaga diagrams, which were compared with the traditional diagrams (Elhag, 2016). The visualization of concentration patterns was documented by Stiff (1951). Similarly, modifications of the Durov diagrams (Durov, 1948) have also been proposed (e.g., Lloyd, 1965; Chadha, 1999). Multi-rectangular diagrams based on milliequivalent/l (meq/L) normalized concentrations are also available (Ahmad et al., 2003; Ray and Mukherjee, 2008).
Kemp (1971) proposed acid-base molar composition diagrams and argued in favor of the total dissolved solids as a parameter of great importance for the classification of waters. Shterev (1973) tentatively proposed water classification based on water-rock interactions in space and time, which involved more chemical components than traditionally used (4 cations and 4 anions) for the water nomenclature. D'Amore et al. (1983) defined 6 new parameters from 7 chemical components of water samples from central Italy, which were used to complement the Hill-Piper diagram. Stuyfzand (1989) introduced a classification scheme based on the Cl-content, alkalinity, the most important cation and anion and a parameter [Na + K + Mg]-corrected for sea salt and proposed two ternary diagrams, one each for cations and anions.
Several researchers (e.g., Lee, 1998; Rao, 1998; Al-Bassam and Khalil, 2012; Teng et al., 2016; Pérez-Espinosa et al., 2019) presented computer programs to facilitate the use of these graphical techniques and establish the water nomenclature. A combination of the graphical procedure and multivariate statistical techniques such as principal component analysis has also been attempted (Güler et al., 2002).
However, false trends (Butler, 1979) and serious consequences of distortion and amplification-reduction of analytical errors in ternary diagrams, caused by closure and constant sum problems (Chayes, 1960, Chayes, 1971; Aitchison, 1986), documented by Verma, 2012a, Verma, 2015, were not considered in any of these studies. As explained by Butler (1979), most workers erroneously quoted the mixing trends in ternary diagrams as straight lines. These shortcomings of ternary diagrams were ignored by all workers, including Shelton et al. (2018), for water classification and process analysis. In fact, if the analytical errors, inevitably present in all experimental work, were taken in account (Verma, 2012a, Verma, 2015), the shape of the mixing curve in a ternary diagram will be even more complex, with varying thickness along the curve.
These problems can be overcome only by abandoning the ternary diagrams and opening the closure through log-ratio transformations (Verma, 2015, Verma, 2020a). Therefore, it is time to replace the ternary diagrams for water classification and resort to the use of log-ratio transformations and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) along with canonical analysis (Verma, 2020a).
Isometric log-ratio transformation was used by Shelton et al. (2018), but only the transformation in terms of new plots was attempted without increasing the dimensions of the solution. The emphasis of these authors was in terms of the comparison of the ternary and new ilr-based plots, for which the findings of Butler (1979) and Verma, 2012a, Verma, 2015 were ignored. Shelton et al. (2018) also followed the combination of alkalis (Na+ + K+) and HCO3− and CO32− (HCO3− + CO32−) as done by all other workers. It was also not clear how the class boundaries in the new plots were constructed; the percent success values for their replacement diagrams were also not reported by Shelton et al. (2018).
There is no special geochemical reason to combine the two alkali cations and two anions for their use in ternary diagrams and leave the two alkaline earth elements as separate entities. Why were the two alkaline earth elements (Ca and Mg) not combined in any classification, leaving Na and K as separate entities? Further, why should we combine any of them after all? Therefore, it would be worthwhile to explore a totally new classification scheme without combining any of these 8 ionic species.
Another point that needs attention is that we always think in terms of element concentrations (mg/L or μg/L) for water classification, which is a natural consequence of the way the water analysis is commonly expressed in terms of the mass/volume unit, and not as the number of atoms of the chemical elements. Would it not be better to name the water class after the highest number of atoms of a cation or anion, instead of concentrations? Our answer is yes; hence, we used molar concentrations to propose a new multidimensional classification scheme for water nomenclature as well as to show its greater robustness against analytical errors and chemical modifications.
At this stage, we refrained from using molal concentrations (e.g., milliMoles/kg, i.e., mM/kg) although it would be much better to do so. The reason for not shifting to mass/mass units was that it is customary, at present, to measure and report water analysis in mass/volume units. In future, it may be useful to shift from molar (milliMoles/L, i.e., mM/L) to molal (mM/kg) units, because the molal analysis would be more precise and accurate than the molar determinations (see the discussion in Verma, 2020a). For example, the weighing errors for a liquid in a calibrated precision balance could be around 0.01% or even 0.001%, whereas the errors of volume measurements in a volumetric flask would be much higher (certainly >0.01%). The dilutions of liquids inevitably required, such as those used for calibrations, would be better handled by mass/mass units. Therefore, it should be better to move from molar to molal units to reduce the final uncertainties in water analysis.
Our multidimensional proposal is based on the hybrid log-ratios (hlr; Verma, 2020a; Eqs. S1 to S4 in the supplementary file) of the molar concentrations (mM/L) of 4 cations and 4 anions and the use of all 8 ions (7 hlr model in terms of 7 hlr transformations) for a robust multidimensional solution through the LDA and canonical analysis. Similarly, the molar concentrations, without log-ratio transformations, were also used for the multidimensional solution in terms of the 7 M conc model. However, in the LDA and canonical analysis, it was not possible to use all 8 concentration variables. The original classification scheme based on the highest molar concentration (Greater molar conc model) was also evaluated. Robustness schemes and probability criteria were presented to decide on the best scheme(s) for the water nomenclature into 16 classes. Further probability-based criteria were put forth to decipher up to 256 water types from the combination of the basic and hybrid water types, being an innovative approach for the water nomenclature.
