Despite an abundant scientific production, the use of models and simulators remains limited in the food industry where this approach is not familiar, in contrast with other technological sectors, and there is a clear lack of human resources to adopt modelling approaches in the food industry (Datta, 2016; Erdogdu et al., 2017; Djekic et al., 2019). Several educational institutions provide training in computerized techniques and approaches, including mechanistic approaches and multi-scale modelling, in their food engineering curriculums, to face this issue.
Digital resources could contribute to these efforts by implementing simulators as educational tools in order to prepare future food engineers to use models (Datta, 2016). Among various initiatives in this sector, a short-term International School on Modelling and Simulation in Food and Bio Processes (http://www.virprofood.org/msfs2016/) was selected to be the training school of the Cost Action CA15118 FoodMC.1 Run by the ISEKI 2 Food Association, more than 100 scholars from all over the world have benefitted from it so far. Another well-known example dedicated to education in food engineering is the website created by Prof. Paul Singh, which contains video tutorials, lecture notes, animated films devoted to food processing equipment, virtual experiments, design problems for what-if analysis, and video lectures based on food science and engineering (Singh, 2008). Prof. Ashim Datta developed a “learning by doing” approach by introducing modelling and simulation approaches to solve biological problems, which can be implemented in a food context (Datta, 2015). In addition to these examples, scientific activity in food engineering generates a great deal of research products, such as large experimental databases, figures, texts, images and films obtained with a wide variety of instruments (from images of industrial equipment to microscopic images at molecular scale), models and simulators, decision-support systems. Most of them are available as downloadable documents or as web pages on the internet. Many professors individually use their own research products for teaching purposes. These individual actions could be combined on a collective scale to convert these research products, including models, into widely available digital resources.
A generic and collaborative approach would contribute to teach modelling in engineering, and facilitate its appropriation by the students (Carberry and McKenna, 2014). Electronic knowledge books (eK-book) where knowledge is mainly represented by conceptual maps (Cmaps), might be used in this purpose. Indeed, they have been shown to be original and effective transfer tools (Ermine, 2010; Suciu et al., 2012), so they may be converted into digital learning tools. In turn, they could be shared by educational institutions and made available to a large audience. By providing Mathematical and Computer Science Methods for Food Science and Industry Integrating food Science and Engineering Knowledge Into the food chain online access, such tools would also offer good prospects for remote and self-training, and could be used for blended learning, such as in flipped classrooms (Datta et al., 2020).
Given this context, the aim of this article is to present a digital learning tool, to train people in food processing using models from academia. This tool, organized into a harmonized format using electronic knowledge books, is named MESTRAL (“Modélisation Et Simulation des TRansformations ALimentaires” that means in English “Modelling and Simulating Food Processing”). While familiarizing students with modelling approaches, MESTRAL would, at the same time, encourage their transfer to industry. For this purpose, we built 15 modules based on eK-book, which are described in section 2 of this paper. We then implemented simulators based on models for different food processing applications. These models are detailed in section 3. Finally, after a first validation step involving all of the authors, we report some of the feedback of a survey taken on the first 100 users.
