Since the computer network provides great convenience for our life, it is also a route of malware propagations. Every time malware breaks out a network, most network users experience great economic losses. Therefore, the anti-malware technique represents a serious challenge that the network defenders are facing. The traditional antivirus measures are mainly to develop antivirus software and a firewall. However, these methods mostly aim at detecting the existing viruses and thereby have the characteristics of passivity and hysteresis [1], which make them unable to manage the increasingly serious network security situation.
Various types of communication networks through which malware communicates with each other represent the main routes to spread the malware. Accordingly, studying the malware spreading dynamics, as an essential supplement to the traditional anti-malware technology, has become a research hotspot. This method focuses on understanding the malware propagation mechanisms through the classical compartment-based SI and SIR models [2] over various communication networks, such as fully-connected network [3], [4], [5], wireless sensor network [6], [7], peer-to-peer network [8], and scale-free network [9], [10]. Analysis of these models provided a sound revelation of malware dynamics in different transmission networks and explains the effects of different network structures on malware propagation. Generally, the compartment-based models are based on the limitative scenario that the propagating network is either homogeneous, where nodes communicate to each other with the same probability, or scale-free, where only the node degree is used to reflect the network structure.
In contrast to the conventional communication networks, the honeynet represents a new active defending network and has been commonly used to improve cyber security. A honeynet is composed of a certain amount of honeypots which represent a kind of security resources, and its value is to be scanned, attacked, and compromised [11]. The honeypot is a carefully configured trap whose main function is to control data flow, capture malware and analyze its characteristics, and release the corresponding patches to defenders. A honeynet is a flexible deployment in different networks. Thus, the number and architecture of honeypot are sure to change the topology of a deployed network. A key feature demand for the honeynet deployment in the malware-propagative model development is that it should be fully independent of the type of a deployed network. Unfortunately, the compartment-based modeling approach cannot meet this demand.
In order to overcome this deficiency, an effective approach is to formulate a node-based model that can catch the state of all network nodes and thus can fully utilize the knowledge on the network topology [12]. This idea was first introduced in the epidemic research area according to different individual characteristics [13], [14]. Recently, Yang et al. considered the patch distribution strategies through node-based approaches [15], [16]. Analysis of these models revealed that the greatest characteristic value of the network played an important part in the malware propagation and thereby these work has potential use in the field of network security. Furthermore, this modeling mechanism can meet the requirement for the dependency on the deployed network type, especially for an arbitrarily structured honeynet. To our knowledge, this topic remains to be considered.
In this paper, a new node-based dynamical model for evaluating the honeynet potency based on the spreading dynamics of the number of infected nodes over an arbitrary-topology network deploying honeynet is proposed and analyzed. The proposed model incorporates honeypots into the model formulation as state variables, and mathematical analysis finds that a key role for deciding the honeynet potency is the greatest characteristic value of the deployed network. Particularly, the range of characteristic values clearly forms the delimitation among the infection propagation between two explicit embranchments, below which the honeynet works at its best level, until malware tends toward the extinction, and above which the malware persists at a certain level. The proposed model is verified by numerical simulations on several representative computer networks. Based on the theoretical and numerical results, a discussion is provided. Accordingly, the results show that the honeynet potency can be explicitly enhanced by either properly decreasing the greatest node degree and the number of connections of the deployed network, or strengthening the data control or patch feedback function of the honeypot. The results presented in this paper can provide guidance on effective honeynet design.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A review of the related works is given in Section 2. A node-based mathematical model is presented in Section 3. A theoretical analysis of the model is conducted in Section 4. The numerical simulation results are provided in Section 5, and a discussion on the obtained results is given in Section 6. Finally, the conclusions are presented in Section 7.
