Children’s ability to self-regulate their behavior, otherwise known as executive control, is critical for successful socioemotional and academic development (Best, Miller, & Naglieri, 2011; Blair, 2002; Eigsti et al., 2006). In preschool, children’s executive control plays an increasingly important role in development as it is a key component for how they interact with others (Rimm-Kaufman, Pianta, & Cox, 2000). Executive control is predictive of children’s later academic and social skills (Eigsti et al., 2006; Ursache, Blair, & Raver, 2012) and rapidly develops in the preschool years assisting in successful entry into kindergarten (Rimm-Kaufman et al., 2000). Over the preschool years, rapid growth in executive control skills plays a critical role in both cognitive and socioemotional development (Carlson, 2005).
Although executive control skills have been examined in monolingual preschoolers, limited research has investigated the executive control skills of Dual Language Learners (DLLs) from low-income homes. It should be noted that being classified as a DLL, in and of itself, is not a risk factor for development (Wallman, 2008). In fact, being a DLL is often an advantage over monolingual peers (Kalia, Daneri, & Wilbourn, 2019). Some recent research has found that for older DLL children (i.e., five to seven-year olds), speaking more than one language buffers the effect of socioeconomic status on their executive control skills (Hartanto, Toh, & Yang, 2019). Additionally, recent research has demonstrated that emerging DLLs (i.e., children with low English proficiency) show more rapid growth in some executive control skills (i.e., inhibitory control) compared to monolingual children (Choi, Jeon, & Lippard, 2018; Santillán & Khurana, 2018). Within the context of this study, DLLs are defined as preschool children who are learning two languages, running the bilingual gamut from initial proficiency in each language to highly proficient in each language. This definition captures the heterogeneous population of children who are constantly changing in their receptive and expressive proficiencies.
DLLs are a rapidly growing population in the United States, where approximately one-third of preschool children are DLLs. The majority of DLLs in the United States are Spanish-English speaking. While many come from middle and higher income homes (Carter & Lynch, 2015), this population is disproportionately more likely to be raised in a low-income home, which puts them at risk for lower academic performance across development (López and Velasco, 2011, Stepler and Brown, 2015). However, there is some evidence that DLL children may have an advantage over their monolingual peers in their executive control skills (Han, 2010). Therefore, it is important to examine the executive control skills of DLL preschoolers, given the evidence that early executive control skills support later achievement. The present study expands upon prior research by examining the factor structure of DLL children’s executive control skills and how it relates to academic achievement.
