Universities play an important role in exploring new concepts and innovation by research, in addition to knowledge transfer through higher education. University academic research communications can be naturally modeled as heterogeneous graphs. Heterogeneous graphs have been commonly used for abstracting and modeling complex systems, in which objects of different types interact with each other in various ways. Academic Graph has received a lot of attention in recent years as an important example of heterogeneous graphs. For example, Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) [1], contains six types of entities: field of study, author, institution (affiliation of author), paper, venue (journal and conference series, e.g. WWW, SIGIR, KDD, etc.) and event (conference instances). Different types of relationships between entities are also included. These entity relationships are rather intuitive. For instance, the fact that papers get published in journals/conferences justifies the edge between paper and venue nodes in the graph.
Various scientific algorithms have been developed to quantify and assess academic institutes and provide rankings [2], [3], [4], using proprietary or public accessible publication records of the academic graph. However, ranking universities is a challenging task because each institution has its own particular mission. Each institution has its focus and offers different academic programs. Institutions can also differ in size and have varying amounts of resources at their disposal. In addition, each country has its own history and higher education system which can impact the structure of their colleges and universities and how they compare to others. Universities usually consist of complex research disciplines in different faculties or divisions and conduct different research in different fields. The analysis of the whole university is a challenging task. The main contribution of this article is the use of complexity-based institutional evaluation indicators and the development of corresponding deep clustering algorithms. The traditional method is to count the output or count the number of outstanding works. For example, count the number of papers published by an institution in a year, and count the number of papers published by an institution in top journals in a year. In this paper, evaluating excellence is no longer a simple matter of counting outstanding works. We used a complexity-based indicator to replace the number of outstanding works. The complexity of papers published by institutions is not only related to the excellent degree of the papers, but also to the proportion of papers published. Instead of ranking universities, more and more investigators choose to calculate various scientific indicators first and then cluster universities [5]. There are much research about different scientific indicators [6], [7] but few investigate about university profiling task-specific clustering algorithm.
Clustering is one of the most fundamental tasks in data mining and machine learning, with an endless list of applications. It is also a notoriously hard task, whose outcome is affected by a number of factors, including data acquisition and representation, preprocessing, clustering criterion, etc. Since its introduction in 1957 by Lloyd (published much later in 1982) [8], K-means has been extensively used either alone or together with suitable preprocessing, due to its simplicity and effectiveness. K-means is suitable for clustering data samples that are evenly spread around some centroids [9]. Many real-life datasets do not exhibit this specific structure. And many scientific indicators represent special data features that usually do not exhibit this specific structure. This task-specific issue limits the classic clustering algorithm performance.
In recent years, motivated by the success of deep neural networks (DNNs) in supervised learning, unsupervised deep learning approaches are now widely used for representation learning prior to clustering. For example, the Stacked Autoencoder (SAE) [10], make use of DNNs to learn nonlinear mappings from the data domain to low-dimensional latent spaces. These approaches [11] treat their deep neural networks as a preprocessing stage that is separately designed from the subsequent clustering stage. The hope is that the latent representations of the data learned by these deep neural networks will be naturally suitable for clustering. However, since no task-specific objective is explicitly incorporated in the learning process, the learned deep neural networks do not necessarily output data that are suitable for clustering. Besides, there are some approaches [9], [12] attempt their deep neural networks and clustering part optimizing jointly to get a better result. They hope fully use the power of stochastic gradient descent algorithm not only in optimizing deep neural network parameters but also in the clustering assignment. However, for university profiling task clustering, without explicit learning normalization, optimizing jointly will not necessarily output results that are suitable for university clustering task — as will be seen in our experiments.
In this paper, we propose a task dependence model, which alternates between two steps recurrently: updating the cluster assignment given the current representation parameters and updating the representation parameters given the current clustering result. To the best of our knowledge, no prior effort has been made to address the scientific features for university clustering by exploiting deep representation learning. Specifically, we cluster data representations using K-means clustering and represent observable data via activations of a SAE. We regard the university profiling problem as a clustering problem. The production and complexity of each university are modeled as joint vectors. We design an efficient algorithm to optimize the process of vector representation in the joint space and conduct clustering. We conduct various experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of our model. Results show that this method outperforms the other models.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows:

•We propose a new Recurrent Deep Clustering Model (Recurrent-DC). Since the deep representation learning and clustering are recurrent processes, it has higher clustering accuracy and better stability than other state-of-the-art models.•We propose a new University Profiling Framework (UPF) for characterizing scientific research institutions in exploring academic graph dateset, which transforms the traditional depiction of excellence into the quantification of complexity indicators.•We select the data of top universities from ARWU and apply our framework and model on the Microsoft Academic Graph. Then we find the positive relationship between university research production and university research complexity of different university groups.
The rest of the paper is organized in the following way. Section 2 lays out the theoretical dimensions of the research. Section 3 formally formulates the problem and presents the overall architecture of the proposed solution. Section 4 describes the experimental setups and presents results to illustrate the effectiveness of Recurrent-DC. Besides, we also analyze the results and present the findings focusing on the application and visualization of the research in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes our work and discusses the limitation and the promising future directions.
