There has been increased interest in merchandising dry-aged steaks at the retail consumer level due to its unique flavor (Campbell, Hunt, Levis, & Chambers IV, 2001; Warren & Kastner, 1992). Although extended dry aging contributes to flavor development, evidence of its effects on color and lipid stability under retail display conditions is incomplete. Previous studies have reported that extended wet aging in vacuum packages negatively impacts color and lipid oxidative stability, resulting in accelerated rates of surface discoloration and oxidized off-flavor development in meat (Ribeiro et al., 2018).
Dry-aged beef is darker and less red compared with wet-aged beef due to lower moisture content and surface drying after aging resulting in less light reflection (Dikeman, Obuz, Gök, Akkaya, & Stroda, 2013; Kim & Hunt, 2011; Kim, Kemp, & Samuelsson, 2016). Discoloration caused by accumulation of metmyoglobin due to the oxidation of myoglobin and darkening due to surface dehydration may result in economic losses since meat purchasing decisions at the retail level are mainly influenced by color (Mancini & Hunt, 2005; Smith, Belk, Sofos, Tatum, & Williams, 2000). Evidence for an interaction between the processes of myoglobin oxidation and lipid oxidation in meat has been demonstrated by a number of studies. The biochemical reactions that occur in each of these processes generate products that can further accelerate oxidation in a reciprocal manner (Faustman, Sun, Mancini, & Suman, 2010). While color is the first criterion used by the consumer when deciding on a meat purchase, lipid oxidation is a major cause of deterioration in meat quality. There are several factors that can promote lipid oxidation. Substrates necessary for this deteriorative reaction include fat content, fatty acid composition, metal ions that accelerate oxidation (e.g., iron), and oxygen (Faustman et al., 2010). Extended aging periods accelerate oxidized off-flavor development in meat, when repackaged and displayed under retail light conditions (Ribeiro et al., 2018). Under normal conditions, consumers typically perceive oxidized flavors in a negative way (Campo et al., 2006). The nature of dry aging exposes beef to oxygen and increases in oxidized compounds occur. Studies focused on the direct comparison of dry aging to wet aging color have not been the subject of much scientific research. Further understanding of the influence of the dry aging process on meat color and lipid stability is needed to ensure dry-aged beef products can be merchandised without adverse impacts on retail display life. Therefore, this study aimed to determine color and lipid stability of steaks from dry-aged beef loins over 7 d of retail display (RD).
