Soil salinization, known as the enrichment of the underlying soil with soluble salts, is one of the processes of land degradation, particularly in arid locations. So, the evaporation of water from lower depths of the soil and small quantities of rainfall to leach down the salts from the root zones causes the accumulating of excessive soluble salts in soils (Gorji et al., 2015). Under such circumstances, soluble salts are gathered in the soil, impelling the soil properties with a significant weakening in productivity (Asfaw et al., 2018). According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO, 2007), more than 77 million hectares of land are salt-affected. Assessments specify that about 33% of irrigated areas in most countries are critically affected by salinity or are estimated to be salinized in the near future (Abbas and Khan, 2007). Since measuring and monitoring salty soils is a challenging task due to high costs of soil sample examination, the precise estimation of soil salinity, by means on inexpensive models, is useful for irrigation planning, yield predicting and water management (Rhoades et al., 1999; Darwish et al., 2005; Chen et al., 2005).
In the last decade, only a few studies have been carried out to address the challenges in measuring and modelling soil salinity, employing diverse statistical and artificial intelligence models. For example, the study of Cai et al. (2010) implemented SVM classifier models to categorize salt-affected soils with a mix of multispectral and texture features as data input sources. The results advocated that SVM could effectively extract salinization and soil-thematic information from the Yinchuan Plain datasets, leading to a valid classification and modelling soil salinity in that region. Ghorbani et al. (2019) estimated EC values using some factors such as soil texture, cation exchange, drainage conditions, organic matter level, salinity, and subsoil characteristics. So, they developed a multilayer perceptron optimized with Firefly Algorithm (MLP-FFA) and evaluated its performance with standalone MLP and the ordinary kriging (OK) models. Conclusively, they proved the higher accuracy of MLP-FFA over a standalone MLP and OK approaches. Singh et al. (2020) implemented five data driven techniques and their wavelet forms to predict soil permeability based on soil physical properties. They stated that among all studied models, the wavelet random forest model had higher efficiency in predicting soil permeability.
One of the most common data-intelligent approaches implemented to forecast environmental properties is the artificial neural network (ANN) model. This can robotically examine the complex and nonlinear association of multi-sourced model inputs through a largely automated, self-learning process (Erzin et al., 2008; Deo and Sahin, 2017; Prasad et al., 2018a, Prasad et al., 2018b). ANNs therefore have an excellent capability to model relatively complex input features as they can check for both linear and non-linear interactions among inputs and output variable (Huang and Foo, 2002; Deo and Şahin, 2015; Raheli et al., 2017; Deo et al., 2018). Due to its widespread usage, ANNs have been validated for their effectiveness in different fields such as estimating soil properties using standalone ANN (Zhao et al., 2010), reservoir inflow prediction utilizing wavelet-ANN (Esmaeilzadeh et al., 2017), predicting rockburst risk in deep mines and tunnels employing FFA-ANN (Zhou et al., 2020), predicting compressive strength of recycled aggregate concrete using ICA-XGBoost model (Duan et al., 2020), calculating slope stability safety factors using GA-MLP(Wang et al., 2020) and predicting ripping production in different weathering zones through in situ tests implementing PSO-ANN (Mohamad et al., 2019). Additionally, as the association between soil salinity and its related properties may not be linear so the ANN model is beneficial for inspecting such relationships among multivariate data in the soil science area (Shahabi et al., 2017).
Artificial intelligence models are intent to build a model that is predictive and tries to find the hidden patterns of complex problems. So, proper establishing of these models is vital for accurate prediction of the specific phenomenon. For that purpose, nature inspired techniques such as firefly; fruit fly, etc. have been applied in different fields for optimizing the artificial intelligence model parameters and therefore increasing the prediction accuracy (e.g., Liu et al., 2013; Ghorbani et al., 2017; Samadianfard et al., 2018; Deo et al., 2018; Bhattacharjee and Pant, 2019; Yu et al., 2019; Samadianfard et al., 2019b; Nguyen et al., 2020). Although soil salinization is considered a recognized phenomenon in irrigated agriculture, only a few researchers have developed data-driven models for salinity and investigated their relationships with other soil parameters. By this deficit and a need to perform research in a diverse range of geographic and hydro-climatic conditions, contemporary explorations have intended to study the association among EC and other soil properties using hybrid learning models. One such termed as ANN-GWO, where the artificial neural network is integrated with the Grey Wolf Optimization algorithm that has been relatively scarcely utilized. The utility of such models, however, is expected to have significant implications in maintaining ecological sustainability and empowering agricultural productivity, including a significant role in formulating strategic soil management policies by decision-makers in the agricultural sector.
Considering the aforesaid, the purpose of this research study is as follows. (1) To construct and evaluate a Multi-Layer Perceptron hybrid forecast model integrated with the Grey Wolf Optimization algorithm (i.e., MLP-GWO) in a problem of predicting soil electrical conductivity. (2) To apply MLP-GWO hybrid model trained with diverse soil samples extracted from Khuzestan province, Iran with soil parameters based on organic matter (OM) and several soil constituents. (3) evaluate seven unique scenarios applying the optimal MLP-GWO hybrid model that represent different combinations of soil parameters to study their contributory role in predicting electrical conductivity. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 introduces a theory of hybrid and standalone models, Section 2 describes the Materials and Method with relevant data and model metrics, Section 3 provides Results and Discussion and Section 4 shows the conclusions for this study.
