Learning from non-stationary data streams remains the focus of intense research because many real decision-making problems should process on streaming data [1]. Nevertheless, the decision-making algorithms should also take into consideration the disproportions among the observations from different classes [2]. Because real data streams may exhibit a high and changing class imbalance ratio, which can further hinder the classification task, then the high demand for this type of solution is evident.
A typical example of such a case is the technical diagnosis in which the fault probability increases with utilization time, and it may be a result of material fatigue. Sometimes the relationship between the minority and majority classes changes in a way that the former minority becomes the majority class. We may observe this phenomenon in tasks related to social media analysis, as the popularity of topics discussed on Twitter [3] or environmental hazards detection system, like oil spill detection [4]. Another real-life example of imbalanced data streams is continuous medical screening1  for a condition being usually performed on a large population of people without the condition, in order to detect a small minority among them (e.g., hiv prevalence in the usa is ca. 0.4%) or the conversion rates of online ads, estimated to be a lie between 10−3 to 10−6. Examples can also be found in banking (fraud detection, anti-money laundry, etc.) or cybersecurity (e.g., spam filtering, or intrusion detection). It is also worth noting here that financial or cybersecurity institutions are trying to develop methods of protection against these violations. However, criminals change their attack models to cheat the security measures developed, i.e., the nature of the decision model changes — so we are dealing with the phenomenon called concept drift. There are only a few works that distinguish the differences between an imbalanced data stream classification problem and a scenario where the prior knowledge about the entire data set is given [5]. This discrepancy is a result of the lack of knowledge about the class distribution and it is notably present in the initial stages of the data stream classification [6]. Our research aims to propose effective (regarding the quality of classification as well as computational efficiency) data stream classification algorithms in a situation where a disproportion in the quantity of the arriving objects from different classes is present. Additionally, this work intends to respond to the need to develop new algorithms dedicated to imbalanced data stream classification methods with particular attention to the non-stationary data stream. Let us shortly present the main contributions of this work:

•Formulating the classification framework for non-stationary imbalanced data stream classification, which employs data preprocessing and classifier ensemble selection techniques.•The proposition of a novel base classifiers training method basing on stratified bagging and preparing so-called dsel (Dynamic Selection Dataset) for the dynamic ensemble selection process.•Estimation of the computational complexity of the proposed methods.•Experimental evaluation of the discussed approaches based on diverse data streams and a comparison with the state-of-art methods.
The outline of this article is as follows. The next section discusses the works related to imbalanced data stream classification, i.e., imbalanced data classification, data stream classification, and ensemble methods with particular attention to classifier ensemble selection techniques. Section 3 introduces the proposed framework of non-stationary imbalanced data stream classification in detail, while Section 4 focuses on the experimental study. The final section concludes the paper and offers insight into future directions in the field of imbalanced data stream preprocessing.
