Many problems in engineering sciences and industry are modelled mathematically by initial–boundary value problems comprising systems of coupled, nonlinear partial and/or ordinary differential equations. These problems often consider complex geometries, with initial and/or boundary conditions that depend on measured data [1]. In some applications, not only the solution, but also its derivatives are of interest [1], [2]. For many problems of practical interest, analytical or semi-analytical solutions are not available, and hence one has to resort to numerical solution methods, such as the finite difference, finite volume, and finite element methods. The latter will be adopted throughout this paper and applied to one-dimensional boundary value problems.
The accuracy of the numerically obtained solution is influenced by many sources of errors [3]: firstly, modelling errors in the set-up of the models, such as the simplification of realistic domains and governing equations and the approximation of initial and boundary conditions; next, truncation errors due to the discretization of the computational domain and the use of basis functions for the function spaces defined on it; then, round-off errors due to the adoption of finite-precision computer arithmetics, rather than exact arithmetics; finally, iteration errors resulting from the artificially controlled tolerance of iterative solvers.
One tacitly assumes that most errors are well-balanced and/or negligibly small. In this paper, the focus is on the truncation error (ET) and the round-off (ER), by considering idealized problems, which do not introduce modelling errors, and using a direct solver, which avoids the introduction of iterative errors. In particular, the round-off error is often ignored based on the argument that it will be ‘sufficiently small’ if just IEEE-754 double-precision floating-point arithmetics [4] are adopted. Therefore, to improve the accuracy, i.e. to decrease ET, one often reduces the mesh width (h-refinement), increases the approximation order (p-refinement), or applies both strategies simultaneously (hp-refinement) [5], [6].
The common characteristic of these methods is to increase the number of degrees of freedom (DoFs). However, ER increases with the number of DoFs, and dominates the total error if more and more DoFs are employed [7], [8]. While typically an impractically large number of DoFs is required for ER to dominate the total error if low(est)-order approximations are used, the number can be very small if high-order approximations are adopted, which are nowadays becoming more and more popular. This shift to higher order approximations makes the results more prone to be dominated by round-off errors. Despite this alarming observation, to the authors’ best knowledge, only very few publications address the impact of accumulated round-off errors on the overall accuracy of the final solution or take them into account explicitly in the error-estimation procedure. The general rule of thumb is still to perform as many h-refinements as possible considering the available computer hardware.
The aim of this paper is to systematically analyse the influence of the round-off error on the total error when using h-refinements for different orders of p. Not only the solution but also its first and second derivatives are investigated for one-dimensional, second order model problems, assuming the second derivative exists in the weak sense [9]. Both the standard finite element method (FEM) and the mixed FEM [10] are analysed for multiple p’s. Furthermore, the following factors are considered: types of boundary conditions and methods of implementing them, choices and configurations of the linear system solver, orders of magnitude of the variables and coefficients. Based on the statistics of the evolution of the round-off error, we propose an algorithm to predict the best accuracy Emin that occurs when the sum of ET and ER is the smallest, and the corresponding number of DoFs (Nopt).
The paper is organized as follows. The model problem, finite element formulation and numerical implementation are described in Section 2. The approach to predicting Emin is illustrated in Section 3. The statistics on the evolution of the round-off error are given in Section 4. The algorithm for realizing the approach is put forward in Section 5, followed by its validation by a Helmholtz problem in Section 6. The conclusions are drawn in Section 7.
