Today, healthcare providers are relying on the advancement of an Internet-based system to provide easy access to patients, provide on-demand services, and improve healthcare outcomes. The advancement of technology has enabled patients not to physically visit the hospital for their routine checkups. Instead, patients can benefit from the use of Interconnected Internet of Medical things (IoMT) for reporting their symptoms and getting medical advice. The use of IoMT devices in healthcare is rapidly increasing and is expected to reach a value of 52 billion US dollars by 2022 [1]. These devices generate massive amount of data related to the health of patients which could be used for personalized recommendations for the treatment and timely identification of any health problem. This health data is normally stored in the organization’s centralized data center. The use of health data and Internet-connected Medical devices have not only brought benefits in terms of better health services, personalized advice but have also created serious cybersecurity and data privacy risks.
Hackers take advantage of software vulnerabilities in IoMT, open access points, flaws in the design of the Internet of Medical devices, and a lack of training in using the advanced technology systems to exploit data breach and security attacks. Cybercriminals not only attack the system for compromising the integrity and confidentiality of the data but also make system resources unavailable to legitimate users i.e., they disrupt the facilities of patient care through distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks or ransomware attack. These types of attacks on the services of healthcare providers can bring catastrophic consequences to healthcare providers. A recent survey by IBM indicates that healthcare providers suffer a loss of nearly 6.5 million US dollars from these data breaches [2]. During 2019 in the UK, 67% of the healthcare organizations have reported a cybersecurity incident [3], 48% of these attacks were attributed to viruses or malware spread from the IoT devices e.g. Marai botnet [4]. In May 2017, WannaCry [5] exploited vulnerabilities in the unpatched Windows-based systems and launched a ransomware attack on many hospitals across the world. The medical devices running on the Windows operating system were infected with the virus, which resulted in the cancellation of patients’ appointments and locking of patient-records. The virus also affected the working of Internet-enabled medical devices. Specifically, National Health Service (NHS) in the UK has reportedly paid around £92 million as the result of a ransomware attack to their system [6].
Cyber threats (Dos, DDos, worms, Malware, Trojan, viruses, spam, etc.) are continuously evolving because of the deployment of a large number of IoT devices [7], [8], [9] Cyber attacks bring serious problems to users and service providers, including disruptions of operations of organizations and the financial loss in terms of ransomware and regulator’s fines. Large organizations (public and private) and Internet Service Providers (ISPs) have deployed standalone intrusion detection solutions (IDS) for protecting their customers, network resources, and data repositories from cyber attacks. A standalone IDS creates the detection model based on the data and traffic logs collected at a single source (e.g. healthcare organization or ISP). Sophisticated malicious actors (stealthy and coordinated attackers) could intelligently manage to circumvent the standalone IDS for a relatively long time, by exhibiting traffic patterns similar to legitimate traffic patterns and a simultaneous low rate attack traffic in a large number of autonomous networks [10], [11]. Under this attack pattern, the standalone IDS shows a slow reaction because of a lack of enough information to be used for efficient and timely decisions.
The convergence of computer networks into the cyberspace, including the use of computer systems for various sensitive areas like cyber–physical systems in the healthcare, requires timely identification of malicious actors because of the severe consequences of the cyber attack. The collaboration among standalone IDS is the obvious choice to create a collective defense model against the sophisticated and stealthy cyber attackers. For the effective and improved cyber defense, the public organizations (CERT-UK and CERT-US [12], [13], European Union Agency for Network and Information Security (ENISA) [14]) and the private organizations (Internet Storm Center or ISC [15]) have already been encouraging organizations to collaborate to achieve effective cyber defense. The exchange of cyber incident information could have the challenge of privacy-preservation that restrains organizations from implementing collaborative information exchange.
A number of proposals have been proposed for the information sharing among the collaborators [16], [17], [18], [19]. These approaches can be grouped into two architectures: a centralized system – where collaborating organizations submit their data to the centralized system and a distributed system – where information from the multiple collaborating organizations is aggregated in a distributed way. The centralized system can be a single point of failure. Furthermore, the collaborator has to trust the centralized system for the protection of the shared data. The distributed system has challenges of scalability and the trade-off between privacy and computational overheads.
Several works have been proposed to ensure the privacy of collaborators. These systems have adopted semantics of data anonymization [20], [21], data sanitization [22] and cryptographic techniques [23], [24] to address the challenges of privacy in the centralized and decentralized settings. The data anonymization-based systems do not provide any meaningful information to the collaborating healthcare organizations and are prone to de-anonymization and de-identification attacks [25]. For example, in a collaboration setup like Dshield, the active adversary can easily learn the blacklisted rules of a particular organization by making a controlled active attack towards the targeted organization. The cryptography-based systems ensure the privacy of collaborators with the use of a trusted set of privacy peers or semi-trusted systems [23], [24]. Freudier et al. [24] use the secure private set intersection technique for protecting the exchange of blacklist database information between two collaborators, without revealing the size of a blacklist and non-similar data points. The system requires a semi-trusted third party for finding similar collaborators. However, the system is not scalable to a large number of collaborators. Locasto et al. [26] use bloom filters to protect the privacy of collaborators, but it is prone to the simple guessing attack. In our work, the privacy of the collaborators is ensured in a completely decentralized way, without relying on the trusted central system for the cryptographic operations and data handling.
In this paper, we propose the SIC (Sharing is Caring) framework where the collaborators, organizations, and health providers can share their views about the cyber incident, source host, IP address, or firewall alert to identify the stealthy and zero-day attacks. We achieve the benefits of collaboration with the inherent properties of privacy preservation and minimal overheads. The building block of the SIC framework consists of three major players: the collaborators (i.e., healthcare provider, ISP or any entity using information systems), the tally server, and the analyst. The collaborator generates a decision about the entity and reports this to the tally server in an encrypted form. The analyst processes the data from the tally server and ranks the severity of each host, IP address, or alert. The adversary or any party in the system cannot learn anything about the collaborators from the tally server data. We analyzed the security properties of the SIC framework for the honest-but-curious and malicious adversarial models. We have developed a prototype to extensively analyze the computational and bandwidth overheads for the varying number of responses. The results show that the SIC framework reports encrypted responses with small communication and computation overheads. Our system has several core properties: privacy-preservation of collaborators, decentralized operations without the trusted third party, verified result aggregation, correct operations even under an active adversary model, and small overheads. We believe that the proposed privacy-preserving collaboration system will bring significant benefits to collaborators in collaboratively identifying stealthy and zero-day attacks.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We first review related work in Section 2. Then, we present motivation and formalize the problem in Section 3. Section 4 provides an overview of the designed system. In Section 5, we give security analysis of our framework. Section 6 provides the prototype implementation and micro-benchmarks for the computation and bandwidth overheads. Section 7 concludes the paper.
