It has been demonstrated that children with ADHD display inadequate social behavior (Nijmeijer et al., 2008) and suffer from social problems in reciprocal relationships (Rokeach & Wiener, 2017). Notably, these symptoms tend to persist over the lifespan of the disorder, as adults with ADHD display friendship problems, poorer social interactions (Kooij et al., 2010), loneliness (Philipsen et al., 2009), poorer intimate relationships, and marital adjustments (Eakin et al., 2004), collectively reflecting their difficulties in social interaction. Previous studies on social cognition in ADHD have been conducted mostly with children with ADHD. Studies have shown impairments in empathy and Theory of Mind (ToM) functioning in children with ADHD (Maoz, Gvirts, Sheffer, & Bloch, 2017; Pineda-Alhucema, Aristizabal, Escudero-Cabarcas, Acosta-López, & Vélez, 2018). Children with ADHD showed significantly lower levels of self-reported empathy than children in a control group on the interpersonal reactivity index (IRI), a self-reported empathy questionnaire. In addition, they showed impairments in ToM as measured by the “faux-pas” recognition task (Maoz, Gvirts, Sheffer, & Bloch, 2019). Although some of these social impairments persist over time (Abdel-Hamid et al., 2019; Bora & Pantelis, 2016), the specific social cognition deficits in adults with ADHD are yet to be determined.
One fundamental aspect of social behavior that may be dysfunctional in ADHD is Interpersonal Synchrony (IS). IS refers to two or more individuals performing time-coordinated actions (e.g., drumming at the same time or two people walking at a coordinated rate) (Delaherche et al., 2012). Given that IS requires the ability to anticipate the other's movement and understand their intention, so that the movement can be coordinated in time, it is not surprising that IS was found to be positively associated with Theory of Mind (Baimel, Severson, Baron, & Birch, 2015) and empathy (Novembre, Mitsopoulos, & Keller, 2019). Synchrony plays a pivotal role in parent-child interaction, starting from consolidation of biological rhythms during pregnancy and continuing to symbolic exchange between parent and child (Feldman, 2007b). Importantly, IS continues to play a role in interactions throughout development (Semin & Cacioppo, 2008).
IS can emerge spontaneously and unconsciously during everyday social interactions such as when our footsteps unconsciously synchronize with our partner while walking together (Sylos-Labini, d'Avella, Lacquaniti, & Ivanenko, 2018) and during tasks performed in pairs (Varlet, Marin, Lagarde, & Bardy, 2011). Even when participants who saw each others' movement were specifically instructed not to coordinate their movements, the movemens were unitentinally synchronized in the frequency domain (Issartel, Marin, & Cadopi, 2007). Spontaneous synchronization scores during conversation of body movement synchrony were shown to be associated with the degree of information exchange (Tsuchiya et al., 2020). A time series analysis during joke-telling revealed that speaker and listener movements contained rhythms which were correlated in time and exhibited phase synchronization (Schmidt, Nie, Franco, & Richardson, 2014). Spontaneous synchronization also occurs when audience hand-clapping naturally synchronizes into a steady rhythm (Neda, Ravasz, Brechet, Vicsek, & Barabasi, 2000).
However, IS can also emerge intentionally as part of goal directed movement aimed at achieving the explicit social goal of synchronizing our movements with those of others. Dancing is an example of such an intentional IS. Dancers intentionally modify the timing of their rhythmic movements to accomplish the goal of synchronizing with other dancers. Notably, they acknowledge that their partners are sharing the same goal and that this shared intentionality is necessary for creating the cooperative effects of collective music and dance (Reddish, Fischer, & Bulbulia, 2013). It can be concluded that while both spontaneous and intentional IS involve joint actions, intentional IS requires greater allocation of attention to the interactive partner in order to achieve the synchronization.
Accumulating evidence indicates that IS encourages social bonding. Synchronized movement promotes feelings of affection and belonging (Hove & Risen, 2009), rapport (Vacharkulksemsuk & Fredrickson, 2012), trust (Launay, Dean, & Bailes, 2013) and empathy (Koehne, Hatri, Cacioppo, & Dziobek, 2016), as well as enhancing capacities for emotion regulation (MacLean et al., 2014). Importantly, even small movement synchrony (e.g., finger tapping) was found to increase feelings of affiliation towards the tapping partner (Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2011) and liking of the tapping partner (Hove & Risen, 2009). A growing body of evidence suggests that IS is linked to prosocial behaviors such as willingness to help a partner with whom someone has synchronized with (Cirelli, 2018a; Shamay-Tsoory, Saporta, Marton-Alper, & Gvirts, 2019) and this tendency is evident even in young infants(Cirelli, 2018b). Moving together was also found to increase collaboration, as measured by success in a joint-action task that required response to a partner's movements (Valdesolo, Ouyang, & DeSteno, 2010).
In light of the beneficial effects of IS, it is not surprising that reduced IS was found to be associated with deficits in social cognition, e.g., in schizophrenia (Lavelle, Healey, & McCabe, 2014) and in autism spectrum disorder (ASD) (Marsh et al., 2013), as it was suggested to be significantly associated with social skills (Brezis et al., 2017; Koehne et al., 2016). As noted above, previous findings showed that individuals diagnosed with ADHD demonstrate deficits in various components of social cognition including Theory Of Mind and perspective taking (Abdel-Hamid et al., 2019; Bora & Pantelis, 2016; Marton, Wiener, Rogers, Moore, & Tannock, 2009), with another distinct line of research showing that these components are positively associated with IS (Baimel, Birch, & Norenzayan, 2018; e.g., Baimel et al., 2015). Collectively, this line of evidence points to the possibility that social synchronization may prove useful in understanding the social problems characteristic of people with social deficits. However, studies focusing on IS in ADHD are currently lacking. It is important to understand whether the deficits of ADHD extend into behavioral synchrony because such a symptom could possibly be useful in ADHD diagnosis and therapy.
Here, we sought to further contribute to the understanding of the social cognition dimension of ADHD by investigating the ability of individuals diagnosed with ADHD to synchronize. In particular, we wanted to evaluate whether disruptions are evident in both intentional and spontaneous coordination.
To this end, we developed a novel computerized task which provides rich sources of data for measuring 3D IS, as it does not require holding a handle or a controller. In the task, the participant and the research assistant sit on two sides of a table (Brezis et al., 2017), with their hands above a Leap Motion depth sensor. The participant and research assistant are instructed to move the palm of their hand together, as they keep it above the Leap Motion sensor (see Fig. 1A).Download : Download high-res image (738KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. (A) The task uses a Leap Motion controller depth 3D sensor, explicitly targeted to measure hand gestures. Data is extracted via the official System Development Kit (SDK). A Python logger was implemented, which reports among other parameters, the 3D position and velocity vectors. (B) CVV hand in Spontaneous – IS (SPONIS) trial. (C) CVV hand in Intentional – IS (INTIS). It can be seen that CVV values are higher in the intentional condition (D) The experiment comprised four types of trials that were given in the following order: (1,2) Alone-Participant/Alone-Assistant (3) Spontaneous (4) Intentional– IS (INTIS). Each condition was repeated 3 times. Each trial was repeated 3 times and lasted 1 min with a 5 s pause between conditions.
It is important to note that this novel task takes a slightly different approach to measure IS than that used in previous articles. More specifically, while existing methodologies to measure IS include a reduction of hand and body movements that naturally occur in three dimensions to one dimension, the novel task measures 3D naturalistic movements. One way by which IS was previously measured in one dimension is by using tasks that restrict the participant's movement to one dimension. For example, in the study by Schmidt and O'Brien (1997), two participants who sat side-by-side were instructed to swing a hand held pendulum. In more recent studies, participant movement was limited to the back and forth movement of a rocking chair (Marsh et al., 2013) or by moving handles across tracks (Noy, Dekel, & Alon, 2011). Another way by which IS was previously measured in one dimension is by using tasks that allow for a naturalistic movement, but reduce the IS measurement to a single dimension. For example, the study by Condon and Ogston (1966) involved human judges who used video recordings to evaluate whether temporal co-occurrence of actions such as body part movement and vocalization occurred. More recent studies have used video to analyze IS between participants that are not restricted to specific movement. However, the methodology that was used to calculate the level of IS did not account for the three dimensions of the movement separately. For example, Schmidt et al. (2012) developed a methodology where a computer algorithm calculated frame-to-frame pixel change information to assess the degree of activity and generate a time series of activity for each participant. The time series of two participants was then evaluated for similarity. Similarly, Motion Energy analysis was used for quantification of movement from recorded video-films (Ramseyer & Tschacher, 2014).
As noted earlier, in the current study we used a novel computerized task, which, as opposed to most previously developed tasks, does not restrict the participant's movement to one dimension. In addition, to calculate the level of IS, we employed a 3D measurement that evaluates the velocity of the three dimensions (Reiss et al., 2019). It is important to note, however, that although the study by Reiss et al. (2019) used the same three dimensions of IS measurement as in the present study, their paradigm requires the participants to hold a handle, whereas our novel task uses a Leap Motion depth sensor, and, thereby, allows measurement of naturalistic movements (without the need to hold a handle or a controller, see Fig. 1A).
Our first goal was to validate the new task; that is, to show that IS occurs in both spontaneous and intentional IS. Next, we compared task performance between a group of participants with ADHD and a group of healthy controls. We hypothesized that participants with ADHD would be less synchronized with the research assistant compared to healthy controls, particularly in intentional synchrony which requires greater allocation of attention. Moreover, we predicted that the level of ADHD symptoms would predict the level of synchrony in the task.
