Geosteering refers to the measurement control technology that adjusts the well trajectory in real time according to various geological data, LWD and measurement data during the drilling of a horizontal well. LWD, as the basis of geosteering, has been routinely applied in horizontal well drilling (Su, 2005). Since the 1990s, many scholars have identified the lithology of drilled formations through logging interpretation based on logging information and judged the relative positions of bits and reservoirs, thereby guiding geosteering and avoiding well drilling outside of reservoirs (Dawoud et al., 2010; Lesso and Kashikar, 1996; Pitcher et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2016; Reddy and Pitcher, 2012; Bazara et al., 2013; Climer and Ozol, 2015; Xu et al., 2016). However, the distance between the LWD tool and the horizontal well bit is usually 6–10 m, and this distance is called the “zero length”. The real-time information obtained by LWD is often the information at the LWD tool, not the information at the bit, which can cause a certain lag in the implementation of geosteering decisions during the drilling process (Wang et al., 2016). Therefore, accurately predicting the lithology at the horizontal well bit and providing a decision-making basis for geosteering in real time are difficult problems that experts from all over the world are eager to solve.
In 1998, Dugas used measurement-while-drilling information to predict the formation dip in real time to prevent well drilling outside of the formation boundary and to estimate the distance of the horizontal well from the top of the target layer while drilling (Dugas and Schroeder, 1998). In 2004, Schlumberger launched an ultradeep resistivity LWD tool that can detect the fluid contact surface and lithological characteristics several metres away from the wellbore, and calculate the distance between the LWD tool and the resistivity difference interface through inversion (Schlumberger and Hart’ s E, 2004). In the same year, Rohler applied imaging logging technology to analyse the formation characteristics, and the obtained image information could accurately locate the borehole in the reservoir (Rohler et al., 2004). Regardless of the formation characteristics analysis or the reservoir boundary position prediction, the purpose was to improve the reservoir-encountered rate. Liu combined LWD interpretation with formation analysis and wellbore trajectory descriptions to establish a comprehensive mapping method that can display the relative position of the current well trajectory and the reservoir (Liu, 2006). In 2010, Chemali proposed a geographic signal, which is a horizontal electrical signal used to measure azimuth resistivity (Chemali et al., 2010). With this real-time information, the distance between the wellbore and the reservoir boundary is measured to ensure that the wellbore trajectory does not break away from the reservoir. In 2012, Pitcher proposed a new sonic logging technique based on sonic changes and drilling speed changes in conventional logging and LWD data to more accurately obtain the distance between the wellbore boundary and the reservoir boundary (Pitcher, 2012). Li established a physical and mathematical model of “probing and ranging” to quantitatively determine the distance between the drilling tool and the reservoir boundary in horizontal well drilling with high measurement accuracy and an error rate of less than 5% (Li et al., 2014a,b). Yang proposed a fast-forward method of azimuth gamma LWD and carried out the inverse calculation of the distance between the bit/reservoir interface, which achieved a guiding role for geosteering (Yang et al., 2016). Ye used wavelet transform and beta distribution to automatically identify formation boundaries and accumulation patterns in logging (Ye et al., 2017). The above studies can be categorized into two methods. One is to invert the log curve and then forward it to predict the logging information at the bit. The formation lithology is predicted by logging interpretation. The other is to predict the distance between the wellbore and reservoir boundary by using LWD data and engineering parameters while drilling, thereby predicting the formation lithology at the bit.
Logging interpretation actually looks for the correspondence between the logging feature parameters and the interpretation target types. In the final analysis, it is a classification problem. At present, the developments of artificial intelligence and data mining technology have made the classification problems easy to solve (Wang et al., 2019; Esmaeilzadeh et al., 2019; Duab et al., 2019; Sohail et al., 2020). Many scholars have also applied machine learning methods in the logging interpretation field and have achieved good results (Zhong and Li, 2009; Song et al., 2007; Li and Li, 2013; Xie et al., 2018; Dong et al., 2016; Al-Mudhafar, 2020). In the aspect of using machine learning method to identify lithology, some scholars use ANN algorithm to obtain good results (Avseth and Mukerji, 2002; Al-Mudhafar, 2019; Tang, 2008; Al-Mudhafar, 2017a, Al-Mudhafar, 2017b; Lee and Datta-Gupta, 1999), and some scholars use SVM algorithm to obtain high recognition accuracy (Ameur-Zaimeche et al., 2020; Al-Mudhafar, 2015, 2017; Bressan et al., 2020). This paper considers the second method, which is to predict the distance between the wellbore and reservoir boundary by using LWD data, then predicting the formation lithology at the bit. Since the LWD information is obtained in real time while drilling, the LWD information is strongly related to the lithology of the formation encountered. Therefore, a method is proposed to establish the relationship between LWD information and the reservoir and to predict the distance between the horizontal well bit and the vertical boundary of the reservoir to predict the formation lithology at the bit based on machine learning. Due to the existence of “zero length”, the lithology at the horizontal well bit cannot be accurately interpreted in real time, which creates a lag in geosteering. Based on the real-time identification results of lithology at the LWD tool (Sun et al., 2019a, Sun et al., 2019b), the machine learning method is used to predict the distance between the LWD tool and the vertical sandstone reservoir boundary, so as to use geometric mathematics and preliminary understanding of the reservoir encountered to deduce the distance between the bit and the vertical sandstone reservoir boundary, and to establish the relationship between D-MP-VRB and the lithology identification at the drill bit.
