1.1. BackgroundSegmentation is an important task for the quantitative analysis of medical images. In particular, delineation of a patient's internal organ and tissue structure from 3D computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is often a necessity for medical diagnosis, patient stratification, and clinical treatment (Medrano-Gracia et al., 2015; Oakes et al., 2009; Csepe et al., 2017). Nowadays, various contrast agents are widely used to improve the visibility of disease-associated structures such as scarring, tumors, and blood vessels. For example, gadolinium-based contrast-enhancing agents are used in a third of all MRI scans (LGE-MRIs) worldwide and are proved to be very effective in providing clinical diagnosis of cardiac diseases (Oakes et al., 2009; Higuchi et al., 2017; Hennig et al., 2017; Figueras i Ventura et al., 2018). However, direct segmentation and analysis of atrial LGE-MRIs remain challenging due to the varying intensities caused by the increased enhancement of fibrotic tissue and imaging artifacts, as well as the varying quality of imaging. Therefore, the current standard of image segmentation and 3D reconstruction from these images for medical use still relies heavily on labor-intensive manual or semiautomatic methods (Csepe et al., 2017; Oakes et al., 2009; Higuchi et al., 2017). For instance, researchers and clinicians at the University of Utah have utilized atrial LGE-MRIs for cardiac research in the past two decades based on their well-established, although time-consuming workflow to manually label the left atrium (LA) from LGE-MRIs acquired from patients with atrial fibrillation (McGann et al., 2014), the most common cardiac arrhythmia.
1.2. Related workIn recent years, many approaches have been proposed for performing automatic 3D segmentation of the LA and other cardiac structures from medical images, mostly for non-contrast imaging. A 2013 benchmarking study held in conjunction with Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) examined methods for automatically segmenting the LA from non-contrast MRIs and CTs (N = 30 each) (Tobon-Gomez et al., 2015). The study revealed that methods combining statistical or atlas-based models with region growing approaches performed the best for both image types among 9 participants. A more recent 2017 benchmarking study for segmentation of left and right ventricles (LV/RV) from non-enhanced MRIs showed that convolutional neural networks (CNNs) significantly outperformed traditional methods (Bernard et al., 2018). By analyzing algorithms from 10 participants, the study revealed that the popular U-Net CNN architecture (Ronneberger et al., 2015) which was specifically designed for medical image segmentation was particularly effective. The top U-Net implementation achieved a Dice score of 93.1% for the LV and 89.9% for the RV, with Hausdorff distances of 6.9 mm and 12.2 mm, respectively.Contrary to non-enhanced images, contrast-enhanced MRIs/CTs have received significantly less attention in terms of researching methods of segmentation to aid clinical procedures. A 2016 study was conducted to investigate methods of LA wall segmentation from LGE-MRIs and contrast-enhanced CTs (N = 10 each) by analyzing the submitted algorithms from three groups (Karim et al., 2018). However, due to the limited number of submitted algorithms, the study was unable to draw any definitive conclusions in terms of algorithm development, particularly with the three methods achieving Dice scores of approximately 55%. Other studies on LGE-MRI segmentation also have limited efficacy as the methods proposed required manually initialized shape priors, such as in the studies by Veni et al. (2017) and Zhu et al. (2013) which achieved average surface to surface distances of 3.2 mm and 2.8 mm, respectively. Since clinical settings require error distances to be minimized below 1–2 mm due to the thin atrial wall (2–3 mm) (Zhao et al., 2017), the methods mentioned were still lacking in terms of precision. Tao et al. (2016) proposed a method to reduce the distance error within 1.5 mm by incorporating paired magnetic resonance angiography into the pipeline. Zhu et al. was the only study that reported a Dice score of 79%.While LGE-MRI segmentation still heavily relies on traditional methods, recent advancements in CNNs have been made for image segmentation in general. VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2014) has been widely used for developing fully convolutional networks (Long et al., 2015; Noh et al., 2015) for semantic segmentation due to its simplicity, and adaptations of superior architectures, such as ResNet and Inception (Szegedy et al., 2017), are currently the state-of-the-art in the field (Chen et al., 2018b). Recent studies have investigated the use of CNN architectures for LA segmentation built upon the basic U-Net structure. Multi-scale convolutions and attention units have been incorporated into U-Net to form content-aware networks which enhance the learning of discriminative features and abnormalities from the complex LA and pulmonary vein structure (Du et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2020). Incorporation of CNNs into traditional multi-atlas and graph-cut pipelines have been conducted to utilize the feature learning capabilities in deep learning and maintain the anatomical accuracy of the segmentation (Li et al., 2020). However, these studies were evaluated on smaller datasets with different numbers of test samples, making direct comparisons difficult.
1.3. ContributionIt remains unclear if it is possible to create a unified deep learning architecture capable of achieving optimal performance for segmentations across a wide spectrum of applications. While U-Net is currently the most widely used CNN architecture for medical image segmentation, and VGGNet and ResNet have been adapted as backbones and extended for segmentation in more recent developments, CNNs still have to be individually tuned for each specific application (Knoll et al., 2018; Zhu, 2019). This is reflected in the current literature which often contains wildly differing implementations of U-Net and other architectures for segmentation tasks in different disciplines, making it difficult to pinpoint design characteristics that can be applied universally. Methods for hyper-parameter optimization, particularly in U-Net, for general problems and/or specific tasks are still an ongoing topic of discussion, and could potentially lead to a more robust framework for segmentation. The lack of accessible, large-scale datasets and the varying quality of the image data (with labels) also hinders the development of optimized methods for LA segmentation from LGE-MRIs. By providing the largest 3D atrial LGE-MRI dataset along with top quality expert labelled LA cavities (N = 154) thanks to the great efforts of the University of Utah over the past two decades, we have gathered the community and organized the 2018 LA Segmentation Challenge (Fig. 1) in conjunction with the MICCAI conference and the Statistical Atlases and Computational Modelling of the Heart (STACOM) workshop in Granada, Spain (Pop et al., 2019). Throughout the course of the challenge, over 200 research groups/individuals worldwide accessed our challenge dataset. In total, 27 teams participated in the final evaluation phase of the challenge and their final rankings are shown on the challenge website (http://atriaseg2018.cardiacatlas.org/).Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The overall workflow of medical images for clinical usage and the 2018 Left Atrium (LA) Segmentation Challenge. A) Clinical MRI scanners were used to acquire late gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (LGE-MRIs) from patients with atrial fibrillation (AF). B) The LGE-MRIs were manually segmented in a slice-by-slice manner by experts to obtain labels of the LA cavity. The 3D LA geometry can be obtained by stacking the 2D segmentation together. C) In the 2018 LA Segmentation Challenge, 154 3D LGE-MRI data (each with a spatial dimension of either 576 × 576 × 88 or 640 × 640 × 88) were split into 100 training and 54 testing sets. The training data and labels were made public to all potential participants of the challenge, and the testing data was used at the end of the challenge for evaluation. A total of 27 teams participated and were ranked based on the Dice scores. D) Accurate reconstruction of the LA anatomical structure provides crucial information for patient stratification and for guiding clinical treatment for patients with AF. AO, aorta; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium.To analyze the wide spectrum of conventional and deep learning methods submitted to the challenge, we first sub-grouped the methods by their main architecture designs and then identified the subgroup with the best design features which contributed to its superior performance. We then conducted extensive hyper-parameter tuning experiments on the top-performing method to identify the exact parameter choices leading to achieving state-of-the-art accuracies. By performing the benchmarking study in this manner, we offered both an overall picture on the major design choices necessary, as well as detailed practical considerations.
