The rise of social media in recent decades has led to the large-scale influx of publicly distributed images. Photo-sharing websites like Flickr (est. in 2004) now house over 6 billion images generated by more than 40 million unique users (Crandall & Snavely, 2012). Originally developed to aid in the organization of photos and enable sharing between users, media-sharing websites offer new and underutilized areas of study for cultural heritage researchers when paired with computer vision and machine learning algorithms. Heritage studies focused on visuality and tourism currently remain theoretically driven, with few moving beyond the conceptual stage to incorporate methods that generate empirical evidence and quantify visual culture (i.e. photographs).
Using Cuzco, Peru, as a case study, we present an innovative application of computer vision and machine learning methods to understand archaeological heritage circuits, the evolution of their aesthetic legacies, tourist movement trends (and associated economic influences), and real-world visual experiences at heritage sites. To our knowledge, this is the first time that vision and machine learning techniques have been used to study the visual experiences of archaeological heritage tourism. Our goals are two-fold: to understand how the intensification of tourism intersects with heritage regulations and social media, aiding in the articulation of travel patterns across a known heritage landscape; and to assess how aesthetic preferences and visuality become entangled with the rapidly evolving expectations of tourists, whose travel narratives are curated on social media and grounded in historic site representations.
Located in the southwestern Andes mountains of Peru, Cuzco is the former capital of the Inca Empire (1438-1532 CE) and one of the world's best known tourist regions. Tourism contributes $7.6 billion annually to the Peruvian economy and provides 3.9% of Peru's GDP (Rice, 2018). Much of Peru's modern tourist economy centers on the Cuzco region and the idea of Andean “timelessness” which links the Inca past to the present (Covey, 2017). The perception of timelessness depicted in Cuzco's imagery aids in the creation of heritage hierarchies, aestheticizes places, and assigns economic and cultural values to heritage landscapes by selecting what is meant to be “seen” and preserved (Watson & Waterton, 2010). In particular, imagery produced by 19th and 20th century explorers helped to popularize Cuzco as a tourist destination and critically influenced how archaeological sites were curated for mass consumption. The Inca sites first reported by the explorer Hiram Bingham have remained at the core of Cuzco's tourism industry in part due to the sensationalism surrounding Bingham's “discovery” of Machu Picchu in 1911.
Today, archaeological heritage tourism is structured by the Boleto Turístico del Cuzco (BTC), a multi-site pass that grants access to 10 sites in and around Cuzco. This includes: Sacsayhuaman, Tipón, Pikillacta, Tambomachay, Puca Pucara, Chinchero, Ollantaytambo, Pisac, Moray, and Qenqo. With the exception of the Wari (600-1000 CE) site of Pikillacta, all of the archaeological properties on the BTC are monumental Inca sites. Those 10 sites plus two others—the UNESCO World Heritage sites of Cuzco and Machu Picchu—comprise the 12 archaeological sites (Fig. 1) in the circuit we study.Download : Download high-res image (2MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Multiscalar map of Cuzco, Peru with photographs representing the six most visited archaeological sites in our study.
Our work is interdisciplinary in nature, bridging the fields of Anthropology and Artificial Intelligence (AI) to build on the theoretical underpinnings currently driving studies of visual culture and heritage tourism. We approach the visual experiences, perceptions, and expectations of tourists traveling to the Cuzco region through a study of visuality. “Visuality” is a concept in anthropology that incorporates how vision is culturally and historically constructed and is defined by “how we see, how we are able, allowed, or made to see, and how we see this seeing” (Rose, 2016). Heritage tourism is highly visual in nature, with archaeological sites being marketed and packaged to tourists as part of a national "brand" that is produced and reinforced over time. The images that accompany heritage tourism and those that are shared on social media influence the commodification of landscapes, ruins, and native bodies and constrain what consumers see during short-term visits. They then in turn impact how tourists record, disseminate, and shape heritage images. For this reason, visuality is a significant framework from which to critically assess the historic trajectory and conceptualization of archaeological heritage circuits generated through imagery.
We aim to quantify visuality and tourism patterns across Cuzco's heritage circuit. To this end, we create a tourist photo dataset using a community photo collection with photos from 2,261 users at 12 sites with associated geotags and timestamps spanning 2004-2019. We introduce a series of analyses using computer vision and machine learning to recover insights relevant to anthropology from this imagery. In particular, tourist movement across sites is fit to a Markov model, which is then applied to determine travel patterns between BTC sites via multiple mini-itineraries (day trips), as well as general sequences of movement between BTC and UNESCO sites. The density of unique users, total photos taken, and average time spent by users per site are analyzed to assess relative popularity among Cuzco's archaeological sites, as well as patterns of movement between sites that reflect how multiple, rural heritage sites are bundled into scripted tour itineraries. Through our analyses, we compare the significance of BTC circuits and individual archaeological heritage sites on the landscape. Finally, to analyze the iconicity of modern tourist photos, we identify major photography themes at each site by clustering in the visual feature space of the photos, and we consider how canonical images define Cuzco's tourist experience and continue to reinforce the region's aesthetic legacy.
We first review related work in Sec. 2. Sec. 3 provides an overview of archaeological heritage tourism in Cuzco, Peru. Sec. 4 introduces our methodology for the case study. In Sec. 5, we present the statistical results and mined patterns of tourist movement and canonical view themes from our internet photo dataset. We conclude with a summary of our findings.
