Target tracking has attracted extensive attention in applications such as intelligent traffic management systems and autonomous driving (Yuan et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2020a; Chen et al., 2019a). The Global Positioning System (GPS) is generally suitable for substantial outdoor positioning applications. However, in urban areas with dense buildings, GPS positioning cannot take advantage of its high accuracy due to the effects of signal blocking and multipath. Conventional wireless positioning technologies, such as Received Signal Strength (RSS) (Duan et al., 2020), Time of Arrival (TOA) (Xu et al., 2017), Time Difference of Arrival (TDOA) (Nicholas et al., 2018), and Angle of Arrival (AOA) (Zheng et al., 2018), could provide real-time accurate position estimation in areas that cannot be covered by GPS signals. However, in practical applications, these methods require pre-deployment of anchors, which makes them unsuitable for positioning estimation in unknown areas (Bianchi et al., 2019). Currently, Inertial Navigation System (INS) that utilizes an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU), could provide a low-cost solution for position estimation in unknown areas. The advantage of INS is that its position estimation is self-contained without additional infrastructure (Huang et al., 2010). However, it still faces the shortcoming of accumulative errors. In other words, it has difficulties to provide accurate position estimation for long-time applications (Ahmed and Tahir, 2017).
Filtering methods provide a practical and reliable positioning solution for improving the positioning accuracy of IMU (Vagle et al., 2018). Jonasson et al. (2020) developed two Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) concepts to estimate the vehicle position during a safe stop. In (Enayati et al., 2015), an improved Unscented Kalman Filter (UKF) is designed for robust estimation of position. Liu et al. (2020) proposed an improved Particle Filter (PF) algorithm for reducing the long-term accumulative error inherent in inertial positioning. However, they could only suppress the growth rate of the cumulative errors to a certain extent, but not eliminate it completely. So far, there are still challenges in improving the accuracy of positioning algorithms with filtering techniques. In practical applications, system models and measurement models are usually non-linear. EKF estimates the mean and covariance of the state by linearizing the state equation, but it is accompanied by a tedious calculation process of the Jacobian matrix (Ghobadi et al., 2017). Since errors are introduced by linearization, UKF is still not suitable for higher-order nonlinear system models (Lee and McBride, 2019).
Compared with other filtering methods, although PF based on Monte Carlo sampling (Wang etal., 2020b) would pay more computational cost, it has better adaptability to nonlinear non-Gaussian systems (Fu and Jia, 2010; Veeramalla and Talari, 2020). However, PF still faces the problem of sample degeneracy and impoverishment (Ghobadi et al., 2017; Fu and Jia, 2010). Existing studies have proposed solutions to improve resampling, such as systematic resampling (Ala-Luhtala et al., 2016), stratified resampling (Li et al., 2015), etc. Both resamplings are based on a layered idea. After a series of iterations, the number of particles will be reduced, which would result in that most of the weights are occupied by a little part of them. Thus, the final state estimation results of general methods are not always as satisfactory as expected. To address this issue, in this paper, we proposed a resampling algorithm based on error ellipse estimation. The error ellipses are constructed based on different confidence probabilities, and the particle set is implemented to solve the problem of sample degeneracy and impoverishment.
In addition, the multi-source information fusion method is also a typical means to solve the accumulative errors of IMU (Chen et al., 2019b). IMU/GPS integrated navigation system could achieve centimeter-level positioning accuracy in vehicle navigation, but it cannot provide smooth positioning services in densely-built urban areas (Zhao, 2016). IMU/WiFi fusion provides a relatively stable positioning solution but requires pre-deployment of anchors and a large number of pre-measurements (Zou et al., 2017). With the implementation of IMU/UWB (Ultra-Wideband) fusion positioning technology, a reliable implementation for the positioning requirements under a long time and large distance span could be satisfied (Xu et al., 2018). UWB positioning method bases on TOA distance measurements, and it could provide decimeter-level positioning accuracy. Nevertheless, most IMU/TOA fusion positioning methods still need to deploy communication base stations.
In anchor-free scenarios, the mobile node only need integrate inertial sensor and ranging sensor to achieve multi-target cooperative positioning based on its own-collected inertial and distance measurements (Fan et al., 2019). The distance measurements between nodes could be used as spatial state constraints. With the use of Bayesian statistical inference, the posterior state mean under distance constraints would be obtained (Zachariah et al., 2012). Xu (Xu et al., 2019) and Zihajehzadeh (Zihajehzadeh and Park, 2016) respectively proposed cooperative positioning techniques based on IMU/TOA fusion, which utilized spatial information to optimize the tracking of multi-target positions. However, these static fusion optimization methods also require the deployment of external anchors. Wireless signals are easily blocked due to non-line-of-sight (NLOS) factors and finally result in positioning errors. To address this issue, we introduced a statically optimized posterior state mean to the filtering process in time series, and achieved spatial-temporal fusion in anchor-free cooperative target tracking.
Generally, in this paper, we propose a cooperative target tracking algorithm that combines spatial-temporal measurements. In the aspect of time series, an optimized historical position is used as the initial prediction center to establish error ellipses, and an improved layered resampling algorithm is put forward to solve the particle degradation and depletion problem faced by traditional particle filtering. Furthermore, we propose a constrained Bayesian optimization method, integrating spatial distance ranging to achieve position optimization under multi-target distance constraints. To further improve the positioning performance, the optimized position status would be applied to establish error ellipses, contributing to the cooperative algorithm with spatial-temporal fusion. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
●We propose a particle filter algorithm based on spatial-temporal constraints. On account of the IMU estimated center and confidence scales, error ellipses with different confidence probabilities are established, and hierarchical resampling based on particle geometric position is implemented. Through the particle division and resampling mechanism of different weight levels, the sample degeneracy and impoverishment problem is to some extent resolved.●To achieve multi-target cooperative tracking, we propose an optimization method for filtering state estimation based on spatial distance constraints. Bayesian recursive filtering estimation in time series could benefit from the spatial measurements. Based on the optimized posterior state estimation, the error ellipse estimation center in time series is closer to the true position, thereby eliminating the cumulative error with the use of proposed cooperative tracking algorithm.
Table 1 summarizes the notations used later in this paper. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the symbolic descriptions, related definitions, and model descriptions of the problems described. Section 3 focuses on the multi-target cooperative constrained particle filter algorithm, which describes the implementation of layered resampling and cooperative constrained optimization using error ellipse estimation. Section 4 derives the posterior Cramér Rao Lower Bound (PCRLB) of the cooperative tracking and details the complexity analysis. Numerical simulation and practical experiments are carried out in Section 5. Conclusions are drawn in Section 6.Table 1. Notations.SymbolDescriptionXPosition stateX^Estimate stateΚJoint position stateml, ClPosition mean and covarianceml^,Cl^Posterior position mean and covariancemz1|c,Bz1|cConditional position mean and covariancexp,ypIMU estimate centerWParticle weightPCoordinateVVelocityKTime scaletsSampling intervalNaNumber of target nodesZMeasurementAAccelerationμProcess noiseDTrue distanced^Distance measurementθTrue angleθ^Angle measurementϵ1,kStep noise of intra-nodeϵ2,kAngle noise of intra-nodeϵ3,kDistance noise of inter-nodeγ1,k2Noise variance of stepγ2,k2Noise variance of angleγ3,k2Noise variance of distanceϕParticle initialization noiseNNumber of particlesδ⋅Dirac functionE⋅Expectation operatorαConfidence probability of error ellipsesConfidence scale of the error ellipseφTilt angle of the error ellipseλFeature vectorIIdentity matrix
