The existing power grid is currently going through a major transformation to enhance its reliability, resiliency, and efficiency by enabling networks of intelligent electronic devices, distributed generators, and dispersed loads [1], which is referred to as Smart(er) Grid. Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) network is one of the renewed components of Smart Grid that helps to collect smart meter data using a two-way communication [2]. Smart meters and integrated Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices are typically connected via a wireless mesh network with a gateway (or access point) serving as a relay between the meters and the utility company.
The security requirements for the AMI network are not different from the conventional networks as confidentiality, authentication, message integrity, access control, and non-repudiation are all needed to secure the AMI. Confidentiality is required to prevent exposure of customer’s private data to unauthorized parties while integrity is necessary to ensure that power readings are not changed for billing fraud. Furthermore, authentication is crucial to prevent any compromised smart meters communicating with other smart meters. On the other hand, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) urges to use Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) for providing the security requirements of AMI [3]. As an example, companies such as Landis&Gyr and Silver Spring Networks already use PKI to provide security for millions of smart meters in the US [4]. In such a PKI, the public-keys for smart meters and utilities are stored in certificates which are issued by Certificate Authorities (CAs). The employment of PKI in AMI requires management of certificates which include the creation, renewal, distribution and revocation. In particular, the certificate revocation and its association with smart meters are critical.
1.1. Problem description and existing solutionsSeveral reasons necessitate revoking certificates, such as key compromise, certificate compromise, excluding malicious meters, renewing devices, etc. Besides, if there is a vulnerability in the algorithms or libraries that are used in certificate generation, a massive number of revocations may additionally occur. For instance, a recent discovery of a chip deficiency on RSA key generation caused revocation of more than 700K certificates of devices that deployed this specific chip [5] and renowned heartbleed vulnerability caused the revocation of millions of certificates, immediately [6]. Thus, to establish secure communication, a smart meter should check the status of the other smart meter’s certificate against a certificate revocation list (CRL) that keeps all revoked certificates. Considering the large number of smart meters in an AMI and the fact that the expiration period can be even lifelong in particular applications [4], the CRL size will be huge. Consequently, revocation management becomes a burden for the AMI infrastructure which is typically restricted in terms of bandwidth. This overhead is particularly critical since the reliability and efficiency of AMI data communication are crucial for the functionality of the Smart Grid. Considering the potential impact on the performance of AMI applications [7], handling the overhead of revocation management is essential.Certificate revocation management is commonly handled by utilizing CRL that is stored in the smart meter. The status of a smart meter is determined by checking whether its certificate is listed in the CRL or not. An alternative method would be to store the CRL in a remote server as in the case of Online certificate status protocols (OCSPs) [8], [9]. In OCSP, an online and interactive certificate status server stores revocation information. Thus, each time a query is sent to the server to check the status of the certificate. While OCSP-like approaches can be advantageous on Internet communications, employing them for AMI is not attractive since it will require access to a remote server for each time. In this regard, another alternative would be to use OCSP stapling [9] where the smart meters query the OCSP server at certain intervals and obtain a signed timestamped OCSP response which is included (“stapled”) in the certificate. Again, this approach also needs frequent access to a remote server. Moreover, the ‘stapled’ certificates should be downloaded frequently by smart meters to ensure security, and this will create additional traffic overhead on the AMI which affects applications such as demand response or outage management.
1.2. Our approach and contributionsIn this paper, we propose a communication-efficient revocation or CRL management scheme for AMI networks by using RSA accumulators [10]. RSA accumulator is a cryptographic tool which is able to represent a set of values with a single accumulator value (i.e., digest a set into a single value). Also, it provides a mechanism to check whether an element is in the set or not which implicitly means that cryptographic accumulators can be used for efficient membership testing. Due to the attractiveness of size, in this paper, we adapt RSA accumulators for our needs by introducing several novel elements as following:•An accumulator manager is introduced within the utility company (UC) that is tasked with collection of CRLs from CAs and accumulating these CRLs (i.e., revoked certificates’ serial numbers) to a single accumulator value which will then be distributed to the smart meters.•We also introduce a non-revoked proof tuple for allowing a smart meter to check whether another meter’s certificate is revoked without referring to the CRL file.•We defined additional entities within AMI and assign functions to them to govern an accumulator based revocation management.•We introduced several security countermeasures against possible attacks to a accumulator-based scheme.The computation and communication related aspects of the proposed approach is assessed via simulations in ns3 network. In addition, we built an actual testbed using in-house smart meters to assess the performance realistically. We compared our approach with the other methods that use conventional CRL schemes and Bloom-filters [11]. The results show that the proposed approach significantly outperforms the other existing methods in terms of reducing the communication overhead that is measured with the completion time. The overhead in terms of computation is not major and can be handled in advance within the utility that will not impact the smart meters.This paper is organized as follows: In the next two sections, we summarize the related work and the background. Section 4 introduces the threat model. Section 5 presents the proposed approach with its features. Sections 6 Evaluation of the approach and its objectives, 7 Performance evaluation are dedicated to evaluation criteria and experimental validation. Section 8 analyzes the security of the approach. Section 9 discusses the benefits and limitations. The paper is concluded in Section 10.
