Social interaction is an innate need of humans, and collaboration forms an integral part of this interaction. People cannot complete many essential tasks in life, such as work and learning, without collaboration and communicating with each other. The mechanisms of communication have been studied for a long time, and researchers have begun to explore the neuroscience of collaboration. For example, recent studies have observed synchrony between the brain activity of people undertaking real world collaborative tasks [1], [2]. These are some of the first studies to shed light on the neural underpinnings of collaboration by providing empirical results of inter-brain synchrony among collaborators.
In our research we are interested in measuring the brain activity of people collaborating in Virtual Reality (VR). We believe this study will help us understand inter-personal communication, and as a result collaboration in VR, from a neuroscience perspective. Remote collaboration in a virtual environment (VE) has been the subject of research for close to three decades [3]. Research has demonstrated that VEs are capable of facilitating remote collaboration by immersing users in a life-like environment. VEs can be designed to mimic nearly every possible collaborative scenario that exists in the real-world. Additionally, the ability to alter visual perspectives in VEs makes them an ideal platform that can facilitate effective remote collaboration [4]. Researchers have studied several aspects of collaboration in remote environments and how they benefit the users. An exhaustive list of interaction techniques have been investigated in order to understand how interactions in VEs, with other participants and the environment, work. The focus of this paper is to delve into the inter-personal interactions that characterise collaboration in VEs. This has been dealt with, to some degree, by researchers who have studied the effects of gaze [5], [6], [7], avatars [5], [6], [8] and other manifestations of bodily interactions both implicit and explicit in VEs [9]. Despite this, there is a lack of clear understanding regarding the underlying neural mechanisms that underpin these interactions and/or behaviours. While this has been addressed to some extent in the real-world, there appear to be no corollaries in VEs. Therefore, there is a need to explore the neural correlates of inter-personal interaction in VEs in order to better understand how brains behave in such an environment. This will help develop methods that can be used to engage two or more brains and potentially induce synchrony between them as a means to enhance the experience of collaboration by inducing a state of ‘flow’.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to investigate inter-brain synchrony between people undertaking collaborative tasks in a VE. We conduct our research using hyperscanning, which is a technique that is used to simultaneously record brain activity from two or more participants [1] and is being increasingly used to study social interaction among people. Previous hyperscanning studies have shown that brain activities can be synchronized among people engaged in real world cooperative tasks such as card playing [10], computer games [2], movement imitation [11], [12], and simulator based training exercises [13], [14]. Higher levels of inter-brain synchrony can increase collaborative performance and provide a greater sense of connection between collaborators [11]. These types of studies are important in being able to understand how inter-personal interactions work. It must be noted that these inter-personal interactions can be of an implicit or explicit nature. Either way, they play an important role in communication between two individuals, and are able to provide us with a significant amount of information on how they are used and affect inter-personal interactions. What the studies cited earlier bring into focus are the neural mechanisms that underpin these interactions. Knowing how and what the brain reacts to in collaborative scenarios is important in being able to design a virtual collaborative system capable of exploiting its perceptual capabilities to create an immersive and engaging collaborative VE. To that end, this paper explores inter-brain synchrony between two participants in a collaborative VE using the hyperscanning technique.
As a result, this paper makes three important contributions. Firstly, it is the first research that reports on inter-brain synchrony between two people for a collaborative task in VR. Secondly, it compares synchrony between two brains when undertaking the same task in the real-world and VR environments. Thirdly, it explores how different viewing perspectives in VR affect inter-brain synchrony. Finally, the research results obtained by us can be used to begin the process of collating data that can inform the design of collaborative VEs to enable better experiences of collaboration.
