Heavy alcohol use is common among young adults attending college. One in three college students reported engaging in heavy episodic drinking (5 or more drinks in a row) and 12% reported consuming 10 or more drinks in a row in the past two weeks (Schulenberg et al., 2017). Underage students attending residential 4-year colleges are more likely to engage in heavy drinking than same-age peers not in college or attending 2-years schools (Patrick & Terry-McElrath, 2017). The high prevalence of heavy drinking results in a range of negative consequences to the drinkers themselves, such as injury or blackouts (White & Hingson, 2013) as well as second-hand effects on others, such as disrupted sleep or aggression (Cabalatungan & McCarthy, 2015). Thus, it is not surprising that most residential colleges and universities maintain explicit campus alcohol policies to deter underage drinking and to respond to instances when students drink too much (c.f., Lenk et al., 2012). Disciplinary sanctions for violating campus alcohol policy often include alcohol education and/or counseling (e.g., Anderson & Gadaleto, 2006).
Students who have been sanctioned for alcohol policy violations and mandated to complete an alcohol education or risk reduction program drink more than the general student population (Merrill, Carey, Lust, et al., 2014) and thus are an important target for campus alcohol prevention efforts (Barnett & Read, 2005). A recent meta-analysis of 31 studies evaluated the efficacy of mandated alcohol interventions (Carey et al., 2016). In the short term, small effects were observed with regard to quantities consumed (aggregated over a week or a month) when compared to wait-list controls, indicating that providing an alcohol intervention as part of an alcohol-related sanction has some immediate benefit. Small within-person effects were observed for both quantity and alcohol-related problems up to a year after intervention. Notably, however, these effects were quite heterogeneous, suggesting variability in efficacy across alcohol interventions. This is not surprising given that a wide range of intervention protocols has been used in mandated contexts. Delivery modalities include online programs, groups, and one-on-one counseling sessions, which may include some combination of alcohol education, personalized feedback, normative comparisons, moderation strategies, and goal setting (Carey et al., 2016).
The efficacy of an alcohol intervention may depend on the context in which it is delivered. Both research and clinical experience reveal that some – though not all – students who are sanctioned for alcohol violations and mandated to participate in alcohol interventions are defensive and even resistant to intervention content. In one of the first studies to document this variability, Barnett and colleagues (2008) found three distinct clusters among sanctioned students. The first was the “Why Me” cluster, which generally drank at low levels and had not consumed much during the incident that led to the sanction; these students did not feel their actions justified the sanction. The “So What” cluster consisted of very heavy drinkers who engaged in moderate drinking during the incident; these students felt some responsibility for the incident but did not find the experience to be aversive. The “Bad Incident” cluster consisted of lower levels of typical drinking but high levels of drinking during the incident and feelings of personal responsibility; these students were the most likely to find the incident and aftermath to be unpleasant or upsetting. Extrapolating from these clusters, it would appear that the Bad Incident students might be more motivated to avoid another sanction than the others.
Additional research confirms a variety of responses to getting a sanction that can have implications for participating in an alcohol intervention. One study directly compared mandated to students who volunteered to participate in an alcohol intervention study; the two groups met the same inclusion criteria (in the last month averaged 3–4 drinks/occasion, had at least 5 drinks on an occasion, and reported at least 3 negative consequences) and all anticipated receiving the same group alcohol intervention (Palmer et al., 2010). Relative to the voluntary students, the mandated students not only endorsed less readiness to change but they also expressed more defensiveness about participating in an intervention. Furthermore, the more defensive mandated students reduced drinking less than volunteer students did after the evidence-based group intervention (Palmer et al., 2010). Similarly, Logan and colleagues (2015) observed that higher levels of defensiveness within a mandated sample predicted more drinking after the sanction and before an intervention, especially among heavier drinkers. These findings are consistent with the joint experience of the authors who have conducted and supervised mandated interventions – namely that receptivity to participation in an alcohol intervention varies widely in mandated samples, which can affect intervention process and outcome.
What remains unclear is how to predict who will be open to an alcohol intervention and who will be resistant. This is an important question, as students who are receptive to learning about alcohol information and harm reduction strategies may benefit from even relatively brief technology-delivered interventions (cf. Hennessy et al., 2019). On the other hand, those who are resistant may require higher intensity such as a face-to-face intervention using motivational principles, a combination that has been shown to be effective in college settings (Hennessy et al., 2019, Samson and Tanner-Smith, 2015). Indeed, the manual for the popular Brief Alcohol Screening and Intervention for College Students (BASICS; Dimeff et al., 1999) observes that motivational interviewing can be particularly useful with mandated students who were resistant to engaging in the BASICS intervention.
Therefore, the purpose of this study is to test hypotheses about factors associated with openness to benefitting from a mandated intervention. This study will use data from the baseline assessment for Project AIMS, an ongoing randomized controlled trial evaluating variations in the delivery of an online personalized feedback intervention for mandated college students. The criterion variable, receptiveness to intervention, was assessed after the baseline assessment but prior to exposure to the online intervention. The baseline assessment included several variables that can serve as a priori predictors of intervention receptivity.
First, we hypothesized that higher levels of drinking would be negatively associated with receptivity to an alcohol-reduction intervention. Higher alcohol involvement may result in a perceived conflict between current behavior and intervention content. This prediction is supported by data showing that heavier drinking college students responded to information about the risks of alcohol use in a more dismissive and skeptical manner than lighter drinking students (Leffingwell et al., 2007).
Second, we expect that students holding attitudes consistent with more alcohol involvement, i.e., more favorable attitude towards heavy drinking (DiBello, Miller, et al., 2018), would be less receptive to intervention. In contrast, more favorable attitude towards moderate drinking should be associated with greater receptivity to an alcohol risk reduction intervention, because of its negative association with binge drinking frequency (DiBello, Miller, et al., 2018) and positive association with self-efficacy for limiting drinking (DiBello et al., 2019).
Third, we predicted that endorsement of the college drinking culture would be associated with less receptivity to an alcohol intervention. Studies have demonstrated that beliefs in the importance of alcohol in college life prospectively predicts drinking and alcohol-related consequences above and beyond other predictors such as gender, norms and expectancies (Osberg et al., 2011). Thus, we expect that believing that drinking culture is important to the college experience would result in less openness to participating in an alcohol risk-reduction intervention.
Fourth, we predicted that variables reflecting a permissive social environment (i.e., higher perceived drinking norms) would predict less receptivity to intervention. It is well established that elevated perceptions of peer drinking are prospectively associated with student drinking (e.g., Reid & Carey, 2018). The normative drinking environment also influences response to sanction events, such that mandated students who endorsed lower perceived drinking norms made more self-initiated drinking reductions after a sanction event and before an intervention than did students endorsing higher perceived norms (Merrill, Carey, Reid, et al., 2014). Thus, endorsing more permissive drinking networks may reduce a student’s openness to benefitting from a mandated intervention.
Fifth, we hypothesize that trait defensiveness would be negatively associated with receptiveness to an intervention. Trait defensiveness refers to a general tendency to engage in self-protective strategies when threatened (Hepper et al., 2010). As established by the Barnett et al (2008) cluster analysis, the sanction process is seen by some as unfair and possibly a threat to self-esteem, which may reduce interest in the learning opportunity represented by an intervention.
Finally, we included two predictor variables that reflect student reactions to the incident leading to the sanction: feelings of personal responsibility and negative reactions related to the incident. We hypothesize that higher levels of responsibility and negative reaction would predict receptivity to intervention, because they signal personal discomfort with the event leading to the sanction.
Based on prior studies that showed male sex to be correlated with resistance to changing drinking (Carey and DeMartini, 2010, Carey et al., 2018); we included sex as a covariate. We also included social desirability bias as a covariate, because of its association with under-reporting of alcohol consumption and consequences (Davis et al., 2010). Identification of predictors of intervention receptiveness may lead to the ability to tailor mandated interventions more effectively and ultimately better intervention outcomes.
