Network embedding has attracted increasing attention in recent years [33], [39], [14], which aims to learn a low-dimensional representation of nodes in a complex network under the condition of preserving different types of structural properties of the network. It has been shown that the learned low-dimensional vector representation could advance a myriad of network analysis tasks, including node clustering [10], node classification [3], [14], link prediction [8], [20] and network visualization [36], [9], etc.
The recent advancement in network embedding has been largely influenced by the Skip-gram model in word2vec [26], whose input is a text corpus composed of sentences in natural language and output is the latent vector representation for each word in the corpus. Semantic information [13] is crucial to automatically construct a knowledge graph [16], and it supports natural language processing and segment images [17] tasks. DeepWalk [33] employs the Skip-gram model on random walks for network embedding, which is originally used in word2vec. With the advent of DeepWalk, much work has since followed. LINE [39] preserves both the first-order and second-order proximities in a network to learn the network embedding. Different from DeepWalk, Node2vec [14] combines DFS and BFS exploration within the random walk framework. M-NMF [42] incorporates the community structure to improve node embeddings. These methods mainly focus on preserving the within-layer structure of the network. However, many complex networks exhibit explicit hierarchical community structures [8], [7], such as social networks, air transportation networks, and biological networks. The embedding for complex network relationships would span multiple granularities, each one capturing successively broader latent structure features. Besides, for two nodes within a community, even if they only have a weak relationship in the within the structure due to the data sparsity issue, the hierarchical community structure constraint will strengthen their similarities that are useful to facilitate several network analysis tasks [40], [18].
With the inspiration of a typical human cognition model, Granular Computing (GrC) was first introduced by Zadeh and Lin in 1997 [45], [21]. In recent years, there is a fast-growing and renewed interest in the study of GrC [1], [35], [41]. Inspired by the human thinking ability to perceive the real world under various layers of granularity, GrC provides a systematic, natural way to analyze, understand, represent, and solve real-world problems by effectively using layers of granularity [45], [44]. The key issue of GrC is granulation which is an operation to construct or decompose granules to abstract the problem space and consider at a specific granularity layer [2], [16], [22], [32]. Elements in a granule are drawn together by indistinguishability, similarity, proximity, or functionality [45]. Herein, we consider a node in the network as an element and an edge between two nodes as a relational tie. Nodes in each community are granulated into a coarse-grained node in the multi-granular network. And the weights of edges between coarse-grained nodes are the sum of the weights of edges between nodes in the corresponding two communities to construct the multi-granular network which reveals the hierarchical community topological information of the original network. Therefore, developing a framework for network embedding, aiming to preserve not only the within-layer structure but also the hierarchical community structure of the original network under multi-granularity, remains a challenge.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a unified framework, called Hierarchical Community structure preserving approach for Network Embedding (HCNE), for network embedding which preserves the within-layer structure and the hierarchical community structure under multi-granularity. In particular, to obtain the hierarchical community structure, multi-granular networks from fine to coarse are constructed by network granulation which reveals the hierarchical community structure of the original network. For preserve the with-layer structure and hierarchical community structure under multi-granularity, from the coarsest network starting, the popular network embedding models based on a random walk engaged to embedding a series of multi-granular networks to learn a set of initial embeddings which preserve the with-layer structure and serve as good initializations for embedding next finer networks. The inheritance of the embedding vector from coarse to fine captures the hierarchical community structure of the network under multi-granularity. Specifically, a series of multi-granular networks are firstly constructed by network granulation which reveals the hierarchical community structure of the original network. The primary idea of network granulation is granulating a network into a smaller approximating one without much loss of information which provides a new tool for complex social network analysis. From the coarsest network starting, the based network embedding models are used to embed a series of multi-granular networks to learn a set of initial embeddings which preserve the within-layer structure and serve as good initializations for embedding next finer networks. Fine-grained networks inherit the embedding of coarse-grained networks as good initialization embedding in the refinement process so that the embedding of the original network embed both the within-layer structure and the hierarchical community structure information of the network under multi-granularity. Repeat the refinement process until we get the embedding of the original network with rich information and stronger expressive ability. Afterward, the learned embedding will be treated as features and fed into downstream tasks, including multi-label classification and network visualization. Experimental results show that HCNE can significantly improve the performance of all the tasks, and the superiority is consistent with respect to various datasets and training ratios. It demonstrates the effectiveness of considering both the within-layer local structure and hierarchical community structure for network embedding.
To summarize, we make the following contributions:
•We propose a unified network embedding framework HCNE, which integrates the within-layer structure and the hierarchical community structure of the network under multi-granularity into a coherent model.•We use the inheritance of embedding vectors from a coarse-grained layer to fine-grained layer obtained by network granulation to model the hierarchical community structure of the network under multi-granularity for network embedding.•We conduct extensive experiments on three real-world networks with hierarchical community structures, and the results demonstrate that our method can integrally preserve the hierarchical community structure and is significantly superior to other models on multi-label classification and network visualization.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We briefly review some related work in Section 2. Section 3 introduces some concepts to formalize the problem. The proposed method, HCNE, is discussed in Section 4. In Section 5, we report the experimental results of the proposed method. Finally, we summarize our conclusions and suggest future work in Section 6.
