Currently, the United States (U.S.) is experiencing fundamental changes in classrooms’ science curricula. Science education reform has been a high priority for a number of reasons including: the majority of fourth grade students perform below expectations for science proficiency (National Center for Education Statistics, 2015), the U.S. is substantially behind other countries in science achievement (Buckley, 2011), and in order to keep up with the technological and economic demands of the next century, it is imperative the U.S. produces more Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) graduates (Hossain & Robinson, 2012). Although there have been some efforts to incorporate more rigorous expectations for science into K-12 standards, there have been very few national efforts that have focused on science and engineering standards for preschoolers (Greenfield et al., 2009). Moreover, children in preschool are rarely assessed for these types of knowledge (Brenneman, 2011). Large gaps in children’s science knowledge are present at kindergarten entry and remain stable well into primary schooling (Morgan, Farkas, Hillemeier, & Maczuga, 2016). Although most research on science academic performance has focused on older ages (Morgan et al., 2016), children have the capacity to develop science knowledge and skills from very young ages (Gropen, Kook, Hoisington, & Clark-Chiarelli, 2017; Morris, Croker, Masnick, & Zimmerman, 2012). Thus, interventions need to be implemented very early in children’s development to prevent the persistence of knowledge gaps into formal schooling (Morgan et al., 2016). There is a critical need for studies that evaluate factors that may be related to early science performance in order to better understand the development of science knowledge and how to best support it. Therefore, the central aim of this study was to examine what academic and cognitive domains account for variance in early science knowledge at the start of preschool.
1.1. Science as an academic domainThe Framework for K – 12 Science Education (National Research Council, 2012) and the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead State Partners, 2013) have outlined a three-dimensional approach to science learning that includes: disciplinary core ideas, scientific and engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts for students K-12. Although there are not expectations for preschoolers, using this conceptual framework to guide early learning and inform assessment development ensures continuity between preschool and elementary schooling (Greenfield, 2015); K-12 standards often influence early learning approaches and expectations (Wilinski, 2017). Each of the dimensions of science are used to contribute to children’s understanding of science and engineering phenomena, and to support their ability to design solutions and construct explanations (National Research Council, 2012). Notably, science knowledge underlies and is threaded throughout each of the three areas of the model. That is, children use knowledge when they employ science practices and consider cross-cutting concepts, recognizing the importance of science knowledge for all areas of the 3D model (Greenfield, 2015).Science core knowledge encompasses children’s knowledge of the disciplinary areas of science, including life sciences, earth and space sciences, physical sciences, and engineering and technological applications of science (Bustamante, Greenfield, & Nayfeld, 2018; Greenfield, 2015; NGSS Lead State Partners, 2013; National Research Council, 2012). Although the categorization of preschoolers’ science core knowledge into these four disciplinary areas is fairly new, extant evidence has demonstrated that young children learn about science prior to formal school entry in each of these domains (e.g., physical sciences: Baillargeon, 1995; Baillargeon, Spelke, & Wasserman, 1985; Bullock, Gelman, & Baillargeon, 1982; Gelman & Lucariello, 2002; Kamii & DeVries, 1978; Krist, Fieberg, & Wilkening, 1993; Solis, Curtis, & Hayes-Messinger, 2017; Wang, Williamson, & Meltzoff, 2018; life sciences: Gelman, 2003; Gelman & Hirschfeld, 1999; Inagaki & Hatano, 2006; Lopez, Atran, Coley, Medin, & Smith, 1997; Marshall & Brenneman, 2016; Toyama, 2000, 2016; earth and space sciences: Nobes, Martin, & Panagiotaki, 2005; Rochovská, 2015; Saçkes, 2015; Saçkes, Flevares, & Trundle, 2010; Schoultz, Säljö, & Wyndhamn, 2001; Siegal, Butterworth, & Newcombe, 2004; and engineering sciences: Bagiati, 2011; Bagiati & Evangelou, 2016; Bairaktarova, Evangelou, Bagiati, & Brophy, 2011; Bustamante, Greenfield et al., 2018; Evangelou, Dobbs-Oates, Bagiati, Liang, & Choi, 2010; Flannery & Bers, 2013; Fleer, 2000; Gold, Elicker, Choi, Anderson, & Brophy, 2015; Kazakoff, Sullivan, & Bers, 2012; Lippard, Lamm, & Riley, 2017). Some examples of findings from this work are that preschoolers explore physics phenomena, including magnetism, energy, forces, gravity, tension, and simple machines (e.g., levers, pulleys, ramps, and inclined planes) while they engage in object play (Solis et al., 2017). In addition, work that has explored preschoolers’ understanding of contamination and disease transmission has shown that children are capable of providing accurate explanations about unobservable biological phenomena, even when they are provided with minimal guidance from adults (Toyama, 2016). Many preschoolers also understand the functions and purposes of various earth science concepts, including clouds, weather, rainbows, storms, and fog (Rochovská, 2015). In terms of engineering findings, preschoolers have been observed to engage in various kinds of engineering skills, such as designing/constructing and setting goals, when participating in free play with artifacts including, blocks, puzzles, Legos, sandboxes, water tables, and snap circuits (Bairaktarova et al., 2011).Practices are the activities children use to explore and explain phenomena, and to develop understandings of science and engineering core ideas (National Research Council, 2012). Educational standards (e.g., French, 2004; French, Conezio, & Boynton, 2000; Fusaro & Smith, 2018; Gelman & Brenneman, 2004; Gerde, Schachter, & Wasik, 2013) have long recognized scientific inquiry as critical to the development of scientific understanding. Scientific inquiry is defined as a series of processes children use to explore their world around them and to construct science knowledge (Worth, 2010). These processes include, observing, asking questions, generating hypotheses and predictions, experimentation/testing of a hypothesis, summarizing/analyzing data to draw a conclusion, communicating discovery and process to others (verbally and/or in writing), and identifying a new question (Gerde et al., 2013). The practices outlined in the three-dimensional model were expanded to not only include scientific inquiry processes, but also engineering practices, such as defining problems and designing solutions (National Research Council, 2012). The eight science and engineering practices includes: 1) asking questions (for science) and defining problems (for engineering), 2) developing and using models, 3) planning and carrying out investigations, 4) analyzing and interpreting data, 5) using mathematics and computational thinking, 6) constructing explanations (for science) and designing solutions (for engineering), 7) engaging in argument from evidence, and 8) obtaining, evaluating, and communicating information (National Research Council, 2012). These practices are not a set of steps to operate within a specific order, but are rather fluid and iterative, and have a tendency to overlap (Surr, Loney, Goldston, Rasmussen, & Anderson, 2016).Finally, crosscutting concepts are domain-general ideas that are suggested to connect learning across the disciplinary areas of science and also provide children with tools that can enrich their core knowledge and their utilization of science and engineering practices (National Research Council, 2012). These concepts include patterns, cause-and-effect, scale, proportion, and quantity, systems and system models, energy and matter, structure and function, and stability and change (National Research Council, 2012). Crosscutting concepts are believed to not only be important for each of the disciplinary areas of science, but across many aspects of children’s lives (Bustamante, Greenfield et al., 2018; Greenfield, Alexander, & Frechette, 2017). However, the research base on learning and teaching the crosscutting concepts is limited (National Research Council, 2012) and little is known about learning and teaching crosscutting concepts for preschool-aged children.
1.2. Science in preschoolDuring preschool, children are developing the knowledge and skills to learn about science (National Research Council, 2005), and many enter preschool already constructing relevant science knowledge (Greenfield et al., 2009; Gropen et al., 2017; Morris et al., 2012). The preschool period has been identified as an optimal time to introduce science content as children are equipped with the innate curiosity to explore the world around them (Jirout & Klahr, 2012; Moomaw, 2012) and are often regarded as “little scientists” due to their natural tendency to discover and assimilate information (Gopnik, 2012). When provided with rich early science experiences, it is likely that children will gain a better and deeper understanding of science later on, as well as develop positive attitudes towards learning about science (Conezio & French, 2002; Eshach & Fried, 2005; Zimmerman, 2007). In addition, providing children opportunities to explore science content in early childhood allows them to expand their current knowledge and understandings of the world (Duschl, Schweingruber, & Shouse, 2006) and supports academic success in science in later schooling (Eshach & Fried, 2005; Morgan et al., 2016).
1.3. Relations between science and other academic and cognitive domainsOne important contribution of the present study is the examination of multiple early skills and science within the same model which provides a more accurate depiction of which skills are related to early science and which are not. That is, work examining multiple predictors in the same model overcomes the limitations of previous work exploring relations between individual predictors, by quelling potentially spurious relations due to acting as proxies for other—actually related—variables. Current knowledge relies on empirical evidence that has examined only individual links between science and other readiness domains in early childhood (e.g., Bauer & Booth, 2019; Bustamante, White, & Greenfield, 2018; Nayfeld, Fuccillo, & Greenfield, 2013). Specifically, executive function (EF; r = .39, Bauer & Booth, 2019; rs = 33-.41, Nayfeld et al., 2013), vocabulary (r = .49, Bauer & Booth, 2019; r = .65, Nayfeld et al., 2013; rs = .64–.66; Zucker et al., 2016), and math (r = .66, Nayfeld et al., 2013) have all been found to be independently linked to early science skills. Other domains such as literacy and math language are also likely to be related to science development because of shared features, yet no studies to date have explored this possibility. The present study will examine a model that includes several variables across domains (i.e., language, literacy, math, and executive skills) evidencing theoretical and/or empirical evidence of a potential relation to science knowledge.1.3.1. Science and executive functionPreschoolers’ performance in science has been found to be strongly related to their EF (Nayfeld et al., 2013), which is a set of distinct processes that help control and regulate attention and behavior (Miyake, Friedman, Emerson, Witzki, & Howerter, 2000). In one study, EF was found to have the strongest relation to science, as compared to EF’s relations with math, vocabulary, and listening comprehension (Nayfeld et al., 2019). Bauer and Booth (2019) also found that EF was associated with science and further posited that EF may directly facilitate the acquisition of science-relevant factual and conceptual knowledge by directing attention during the learning process. Thus, EF skills could be important for engaging in early science and engineering activities. Further, science and engineering activities can involve hands-on learning/experimentation, critical thinking, persistence, trial-and-error, problem solving, risk-taking, and collaboration with peers, which are situations that may employ EF skills (Bustamante, Greenfield et al., 2018). For example, when children are engaging in inquiry processes such as predicting and experimenting, they are engaging in critical thinking and experimentation, which are activities that recruit children’s EF. Thus, as science content is cognitively challenging and stimulating, children may be required to have a strong foundation of EF processes to engage in science learning.1.3.2. Science, vocabulary, and literacyLanguage is suggested to be a foundational cognitive skill for science, such that although a child may have some science-relevant knowledge, they may not be able to verbalize it without having the language to do so (Norris & Phillips, 2003). Further, a critical component to learning science is learning its linguistic registers (Pappas, 2006). For example, knowledge of the words “sink,” “float,” “heavy,” and “light” could contribute to a child’s exploration of the properties of objects during a physical sciences activity at a water table. Studies have shown that teachers use more advanced language during science instruction than during other classroom activities (Cabell, DeCoster, LoCasale-Crouch, Hamre, & Pianta, 2013; Fuccillo, 2011). Thus, in order for children to grapple with science concepts during classroom instruction, they may require the necessary vocabulary to understand what is being taught to them and to be able to communicate their understandings (Eshach & Fried, 2005).Although there is extant evidence demonstrating that science and reading are highly related in middle and high school (Maerten-Rivera, Myers, Lee, & Penfield, 2010; Morgan et al., 2016), no work has explored this relation with young children. Developing a strong foundation of literacy early on may be critical for academic success in science later on (Tate, Jones, Thorne-Wallington, & Hogrebe, 2012). There are substantive gaps in science achievement between groups of children in later elementary school and middle school, and these discrepancies are predicted by reading achievement in first grade (Morgan et al., 2016). One possible reason for these achievement gaps is western science’s dependence upon written text (Norris & Phillips, 2003). Further, young children who struggle with reading develop smaller vocabularies (Cunningham & Stanovich, 1997) and are less able to comprehend scientific literature later on (Tate et al., 2012). There is some work that suggests these domains may even be related earlier than formal schooling. Gelman and Brenneman (2004) identified that literacy and vocabulary played key roles in the science activities that were a part of the Preschool Pathways to Science (PrePS) intervention. During the science activities in this intervention, children documented observations in a science journal, which teachers later read aloud, thus enforcing literacy and language development. Therefore, it is likely that both vocabulary and literacy support children’s abilities to learn about science.1.3.3. Science and mathematicsIn addition to practicing language, when children participate in science activities, they are often found to be engaging in math-related behaviors such as estimation and counting (Gelman & Brenneman, 2004), recognizing patterns, engaging in measurement, comparing and contrasting, and sorting and organizing (Bustamante, Greenfield et al., 2018). For example, a child’s cardinal number knowledge and number recognition and comparison abilities could be employed when they are comparing the weights of objects using a digital scale during a physical sciences activity. Although it is well understood that science and math are highly related in older children (Gustin & Corazza, 1994; Maerten-Rivera et al., 2010; Slykhuis & Park, 2006), some work with preschoolers has shown these domains to be related early on. Further, Nayfeld et al. (2013) found that preschooler’s math was strongly correlated with their performance in science (r = .66).No known studies have examined the relations between science and math language. When children are engaging in math-related behaviors, they may also be engaging in math discourse. Although children's knowledge of the words utilized in early mathematics supports their ability to engage in math skills (Purpura & Reid, 2016), it could also support math skills that are commonly drawn upon when engaged in science learning. For example, when young children are engaging in physics activities, such as building a tower from various materials, they may employ spatial or quantitative language when reasoning about their construction process (e.g., “The block above this block is smaller/weighs less.” or “The pieces at the top of the tower are the smallest.”). Therefore, there may be some overlap in the language that is used when reasoning both mathematically and scientifically.1.3.4. Limitations of prior workAlthough studies suggest that science education affords children opportunities to engage in experiences that integrate multiple content areas, such as literacy, math, and language (Gelman & Brenneman, 2004; Inan, Trundle, & Kantor, 2010), it is not yet understood if these other domains uniquely contribute to children’s science performance. Studies that have explored what academic and cognitive domains are predictive or associated with science have only examined the relations between science and one or two other domains. Furthermore, this is the first study to date to examine several academic and cognitive domains as predictors of preschoolers’ science knowledge within the same model. This is also the first study to date to examine the relation between literacy and science, and math language and science, for preschool-aged children. Although Nayfeld et al. (2013) did include science, EF, listening comprehension, and vocabulary in their model predicting growth in school readiness skills, only EF and science were examined as predictors of later science performance. Associations between math, vocabulary, and listening comprehension and science were not examined (Nayfeld et al., 2013). When individual predictors are included in a model, they could be acting as proxies for the other variables not included in the model inadvertently identifying spurious relations. Thus, including each of these domains within the same model will help us understand the unique relations between each domain and science.
1.4. The current studyThe current study examined possible concurrent predictors of science core knowledge, including EF, literacy, vocabulary, math, and math language. Thus, this study was guided by the following research questions: 1) Are children’s EF, vocabulary, literacy, math, and math language skills in preschool concurrently predictive of their science core knowledge? and if they are related, 2) Do the domains remain predictive of science core knowledge when included in the same model? Given prior theoretical and/or empirical evidence that each of these domains are related to children’s science skills, it was hypothesized that math, vocabulary, literacy, math language, and EF would account for unique variance in science knowledge when their relations with science were explored individually and when all of these domains were included in the same model.
