One of the most challenging fields in computational biology is the field of proteomics which deals with offering better comprehension of protein dynamics and functions. It is well known that proteins have an important role in all chemical processes indispensable for life (Lesk, 2004). Much research has been carried out in recent years in the field of proteomics, such as clustering based detection of protein complexes from protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks (Wang et al., 2019), predicting disease-related genes based on protein complexes (Lei & Zhang, 2019), identifying influential genes in PPI networks (Sun et al., 2018), protein folding optimization using differential evolution (Boskovic & Brest, 2018) or detecting the evolutionary relationships between proteins (Santander-Jimenez et al., 2019).
The so called primary structure of proteins is composed by a sequence of amino acids (Ambrogelly et al., 2007). The chemical composition of the component amino acids combined with the influence of various external factors determine the folding of the protein in a three dimensional structure which determines its biological function (Voet & Voet, 2011). During their lifetime, due to various environmental factors, proteins change their structure (Tokuriki & Tawfik, 2009) through the so called conformational transitions or conformations.
Proteins which have similar functions and high structural similarity are grouped in families (Wei & Zou, 2016), which in turn form superfamilies. The proteins from the same superfamily have a lower sequence identity, but they have similar functional and structural properties. Machine learning based protein analysis at the superfamily level is more difficult than at the family level, due to the diversity of protein sequences at this level. Despite its complexity, the problem of deciding if proteins belong to the same superfamily is important as it may offer a better understanding of proteins’ features.
The three dimensional representation of proteins is usually encoded into a lower dimensional one in order to facilitate the use of computational methods in analyzing the structure of proteins. Structural alphabets (SAs) (Pandini et al., 2010) represent means to encode the 3D structure of a protein conformation into a word (linear sequence of characters) over a certain alphabet of letters. Although the structural alphabet based representation method is very popular and is being leveraged by the system proposed in this paper, it is worth mentioning that in the bioinformatics literature there are other type of approaches used for 2D protein representation. For instance Suryanto et al. (2018) proposed an approach in which the structure of the protein is represented using a set of multi-view 2D images of 3D protein structures.
For obtaining a better understanding of the proteins’ biological function, researchers are interested in analyzing their dynamics and the way they are transitioning from one conformation to another. Comprehending how proteins change their structure would be helpful in discovering possible anomalies during their folding process and thus in preventing serious diseases for the organism. There are various approaches in the literature regarding the use of both supervised and unsupervised machine learning methods for protein analysis. For instance, clustering, self-organizing maps and autoencoders were already applied for unsupervisedly uncovering patterns in proteins’ conformations (Albert, Czibula et al., 2018, Teletin, Czibula, Albert et al., 2018, Teletin, Czibula, Bocicor et al., 2018) and detecting structural similarities of proteins (Albert, Teletin et al., 2018, Bocicor et al., 2017, Teletin, Czibula and Bocicor, 2019).
Unsupervisedly detecting patterns in protein conformations would be helpful for getting a better understanding of proteins dynamics and evolution. Since the shape of the protein dictates its biological function, any anomaly detected during the folding process can determine a defective and malformed protein that can cause severe illnesses. Detecting anomalies in the protein folding mechanism can help in the prevention of diseases and anomalous processes. There is an interest in the literature mainly in detecting anomalous diffusion of proteins (Deak & Derenyi, 2016) or anomalous dynamics of specific proteins (Yamamoto et al., 2015). Even if early approaches in proteomics focused on anomaly detection in protein related data (Christopher et al., 1971, Earle et al., 1959), only few approaches use computational intelligence methods. Most existing related work relies on chemical or biological analyses.
The main contribution of the paper is to investigate the use of autoencoders for deciding if a certain protein or a conformation of a protein is structurally dissimilar to its superfamily, thus being likely to represent an anomaly with respect to that superfamily. There are studies that focus on studying the capacity of neural networks based autoencoders for learning meaningful features. For instance in Nguyen, Wong et al. (2019) the convergence of two layer autoencoders when learning generated data was proven. Based on these theoretical results we are going to consider autoencoders as models that are capable to learn meaningful insights from complex data such as protein structure.
Classifying protein sequences into superfamilies is revealed by the bioinformatics literature as an important problem investigated by researchers with the goal of analyzing and interpreting protein data (Wu & McLarty, 2000). Additionally, detecting pathological cases such as protein incorrect folding or mutations is extremely important for developing new better drugs that can inhibit the protein’s uncontrolled behavior. According to the Protein Structure Classification database (CATH: Protein Structure Classification Database at UCL, 0000), the proteins belonging to the same superfamily have similar three-dimensional structure (Knudsen & Wiuf, 2010). As similar protein sequences will most probably have similar biochemical functions (Bandyopadhyay, 2005), a superfamily is a group of proteins that share similarity in structure and function (Bandyopadhyay, 2005). Classifying an unknown protein into one known superfamily will be helpful in predicting its function and/or the structure of the unknown sequence and thus replacing the expensive biological experiments performed in the laboratory (Bandyopadhyay, 2005). An important practical application of superfamily classification is in drug discovery. For instance, the fact that a certain sequence from a disease was classified by our classification method as belonging to a certain superfamily F would help in designing drugs for that disease by trying to combine existing drugs for F (Bandyopadhyay, 2005).
The proteins’ conformational transitions are represented in our study using letters from the structural alphabet (SA) introduced by Pandini et al. (2010). The research questions which represent the focus of our paper are the following:

RQ1To what extent may autoencoders be used for detecting protein conformations that are likely to be anomalous in relation to the protein’s superfamily, i.e. conformations whose structure does not resemble to their encoded information?RQ2How does the representation of the proteins’ conformations influence the predictive performance of the detection process? Two methods for encoding the conformations will be comparatively analyzed: one in which the SA letters are encoded using their rank within the structural alphabet and the second in which the representation based on SA letters is enhanced with the angles formed between consecutive amino acids from the proteins primary structure.RQ3How to apply the approach introduced for answering the previous research questions at a protein level, i.e. to decide if a protein is likely to belong to a certain superfamily considering the dissimilarity between its conformational transitions and the encoded structural information about the superfamily?
For answering the first research question, we are introducing a supervised learning approach AnomalP used for providing the likelihood that a protein conformation is anomalous with regard to the protein superfamily. The prediction is made considering the dissimilarity degree of the conformation with respect to all the conformations of the proteins from the given superfamily, as encoded into an autoencoder. The proteins’ conformational transitions are represented as a sequence of characters (strings) obtained by encoding their three dimensional structure using the structural alphabet developed by Pandini et al. (2010). AnomalP consists of several autoencoders, one for each analyzed superfamily. The autoencoder for a certain superfamily will be trained to recognize conformations which are similar (or dissimilar) to its structure. The underlying assumption is that an autoencoder does not replicate data which does not resemble to the one which it has seen during training.
The second research question will be investigated by considering an alternative vectorial representation for the conformations by replacing the SA letters with the angles between the underlying consecutive amino acids from the protein’s primary structure (i.e. the torsion angle of all four atoms (Pandini et al., 2010) together with the alpha carbon atoms of the amino acids).
For highlighting the generality of AnomalP and for answering the third research question, AnomalP will be applied at a higher granularity level, to decide if a certain protein belongs or not to a given superfamily. Through the approach introduced in this paper we aim to highlight that autoencoders are able to self-supervisedly learn the structural similarity and relationships between proteins, as well as to be used as an anomaly detector, i.e to determine if a conformation or a protein is likely to be abnormal with respect to a certain superfamily. In addition, AnomalP emphasizes that autoencoders are capable to learn biological relevant patterns from protein data. Experiments will be conducted on real proteins belonging to nine superfamilies. The obtained results reveal a very good performance of the proposed approach. To the best of our knowledge, the approach proposed in this paper is new in the literature regarding inter-protein data analysis.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The background concepts related to our approach are presented in Section 2. Our AnomalP approach and the methodology for predicting anomalous protein conformations are introduced in Section 3. The experiments and the obtained experimental results are presented in Section 4, while Section 5 provides an analysis of the results, as well as a comparison to existing similar work. Section 6 summarizes the conclusions of the paper and directions for further improvements and extensions.
