Phishing is a common cyber-attack method with attempts to illegally obtain sensitive data by publishing fraud websites pretending to be legitimate. Sensitive data acquired by phishing is mainly social and financial information such as username/password and credit card details, which brings serious financial losses to the victims (Nguyen et al., 2014). Phishing can be initiated in the following ways: 1) randomly disseminate spams containing phishing links to the victims; 2) steal the personal property by disguising fake websites as the existing trustworthy entities such as online banking and stock trading; 3) create fraud e-commerce websites with fake commodity information to defraud money from purchasing; 4) send misleading messages with phishing links to the users by some social software (Xu et al., 2013, Xiang et al., 2011a, Xiang et al., 2011b, Moustafa et al., 2018). According to the report released by Anti-phishing Alliance of China, around 3 billion RMB of loss was caused by phishing attacks and 30% of online shopping customers suffered from phishing (APAC, 2017). The Anti-Phishing Working Group (APWG) reported that 100 million phishing websites were recorded in 2018, and the most affected fields were payment service, software-as-a-service (SaaS) and webmail services occupied (APWG, 2018). The events of phishing attacks show an increasing trend despite the fact that many anti-phishing solutions have been utilized.
The existing research on detecting phishing can be summarized as: Help the users to improve the ability of recognizing phishing websites (Dou et al., 2017). Design the phishing detection techniques for automatic recognition or warning of phishing websites. The phishing detection techniques receive lots of attention from recent work and make great progress (Pham et al., 2018). Blacklisting is the most widely used phishing detection technique, which is utilized in many popular browsers (e.g. IE, Firefox and Chrome). By checking whether the URL of the current web page matches any records in a blacklist, it can make a decision to block the URL existed in the blacklist. In addition, several software and browser plugins such as NetCraft and SiteAdvisor filter phishing websites by loading browser toolbars. However, these blacklist-based approaches require frequently updating the blacklist for getting the newly published phishing websites (Netcraft; Mcafee Labs, 2012). This means that they cannot identify the phishing URL which is not in the blacklist in advance.
Among various detection techniques, machine learning is the most extensive used technique in heuristic-based methods. Most of them take phishing detection as a classification problem. Zhou et al. abstracted the website to a 30-dimensional feature vector and used machine learning method (Zhou et al., 2019) to detect the phishing websites. Liu et al. (Liu et al., 2010) proposed a semantic-link-network-based (SLN) approach, which builds SLN on the target websites and reasons phishing websites through semantic relations. (Sahingoz, Buber, Demir, & Diri, 2019) proposed real-time and language-independent classification algorithms are proposed to detect phishing websites. To enrich the feature vectors, the authors adopt NLP-based method to extract the features. The EMD algorithm was introduced (Fu, Liu, & Deng, 2006) to compute images similarities from HTML files. In addition, some deep learning based techniques have been applied in detecting phishing. The authors in (Halgaš, Agrafiotis & R.C. Nurse) proposed an online phishing detection method based on Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs). This work is efficient but training RNN is time consuming. Moreover, it just takes few text features into account, which cannot fully characterize the phishing websites. (Smadi, Aslam, and Zhang, 2018) proposed a novel detection framework based on evolving neural network (ENN) and reinforcement learning algorithms. Although this method achieves high detection accuracy with a low false positive rate, it takes a long time for the reinforcement learning process. In addition, (Xiang et al., 2011a, Xiang et al., 2011b) compared six machine learning methods for detecting the phishing websites, including SVM, Logistic Regression (LR), Bayesian Network (BN), J48 Decision Tree, Random Forest (RF) and Adaboost, and produced the result that BN performed the best among other classifiers. However, they achieved only about 92% true positive rate on unique testing phishing websites. Although the existing approaches obtain good detection performances, they are time consuming on training detection model and the detection accuracy is not optimal.
To bridge the research gap, in this paper, we propose an improved ELM (Non-inverse matrix extreme learning machine, NIOSELM) as the classifier in terms of a faster training speed and higher detection accuracy. To comprehensively characterize the phishing websites, the surface features, topological features, and deep features are extracted and blended globally. To reduce the strong correlations of the features selected manually, and shorten the time on training the detector or testing the detection model. We adopt Stacked Denoising Auto-Encoder (SADE) to reduce the dimensionality of the experimental data (Abusitta, Bellaiche, Dagenais, & HalabiA, 2019) and Adaptive Synthetic Sampling (ADASYN) algorithm (Baryannis, Dani, & Antoniou, 2019) to generate the synthetic minority class samples to balance the dataset.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the preliminary work and gives an overview of the proposed detection framework. In Section 3, the detailed explanations of 3 kinds of features are introduced, and the data pre-processing algorithms are introduced briefly. A novel phishing detection algorithm is proposed and described in details. In Section 4, lots of experiments are conducted to verify the efficiency and feasibility of the proposed mechanism. Finally, we end this paper with conclusions in Section 5.
