In recent years, machine learning has achieved remarkable progress in a wide range of applications [1], [2], [3], [4], mainly owing to the development of deep neural networks [5], [6]. One basic hypothesis of machine learning models is that the training and testing data should consist Independent and Identically Distributed (I.I.D.) samples. However, this ideal hypothesis is fragile in real cases where we can hardly impose constraints on the testing data distribution. This implies that the model minimizing empirical error on training data does not necessarily perform well on testing data, leading to the challenge of Non-I.I.D. learning. The problem is more serious when the training samples are not sufficient to approximate the training distribution itself. How to develop Non-I.I.D. learning methods that are robust to distribution shifting is of paramount significance for both academic research and industrial applications.
Benchmark datasets, providing a common ground for competing approaches, are always important to promote the development of a research direction. Take image classification, a prominent learning task, as an example. Its development benefits a lot from the benchmark datasets, such as PASCAL VOC [7], MSCOCO [8], and ImageNet [9]. In particular, it is the ImageNet, a large-scale and well-structured image dataset, that successfully demonstrates the capability of deep learning and thereafter significantly accelerates the advancement of deep convolutional neural networks. On these datasets, it is easy to establish an I.I.D. image classification setting by random data splitting. But they do not provide an explicit option to simulate a Non-I.I.D. setting. The dataset that can well support the research on Non-I.I.D. image classification is still in vacancy.
In this paper, we construct and release a dataset that is dedicately designed for Non-I.I.D. image classification, named NICO (Non-I.I.D. Image dataset with Contexts). The basic idea is to label images with both main concept and contexts. For example, in the category of ‘dog’, images are divided into different contexts such as ‘grass’, ‘car’, ‘beach’, meaning the ‘dog’ is on the grass, in the car, or on the beach respectively. With these contexts, one can easily design an Non-I.I.D. setting by training a model in some contexts and testing it in the other unseen contexts. Meanwhile, the degree of distribution shift can be flexibly controlled by adjusting the proportions of different contexts in training and testing data. Till now, NICO contains 19 classes, 188 contexts and nearly 25,000 images in total. The scale is still increasing, and the current scale has been able to support the training of deep convolution networks from scratch.
The NICO dataset can support, but not limited to, two typical settings of Non-I.I.D. image classification. One is Targeted Non-I.I.D. image classification, where testing data distribution is known but different from training data distribution. The other is General Non-I.I.D. image classification, where testing data distribution is unknown and different from training data distribution. Apparently, the latter one is much more realistic and challenging. A model learned in one environment could be possibly applied in many other environments. In this case, the robustness of a model in the environments with unknown distribution shift is a highly favorable characteristic. It is especially critical in risk-sensitive applications like medical and security.
Due to the lack of a well-structured and reasonable-scaled dataset, there is still no convolutional neural network model proposed to address the general Non-I.I.D. image classification problem. In this paper, we propose a novel model CNBB5 (ConvNet with Batch Balancing) as a baseline of exploiting CNN model for general Non-I.I.D. image classification.The experimental results show that the proposed batch balancing mechanism can help a ConvNet model to resist, to some extent, the negative effect brought by Non-IIDness.
In a word, NICO released in this paper is devoted to advance the research about intelligence perception of efficient and robust pattern recognition across diverse environments in visual field. The works that focus on the human cognition, such as causality, always have better interpretability naturally and could design and execute experiments in kinds of Non-I.I.D. settings, compare their performances fairly in NICO. What’s more, the ability of adjusting distribution shift controllably can indeed bring more explainability to the models and experiments, expecially for deep learning [10], [11]. Also the CNBB proposed is a preliminary attempt to introduce causal mechanism into the deep ConvNets.
