Skin cancer is one of the most common types of cancer, and one of the few whose incidence rates have been steadily increasing [1]. Thus, it is crucial to improve the diagnostic accuracy, as well as the rates of early diagnosis. Two lines of work are being pursued to address this health problem: (i) investment in newer and better imaging techniques, such as confocal microscopy and spectral imaging; and (ii) development of computer aided diagnostic systems (CADS) for the automatic analysis of dermoscopy images. In particular, the latter has seen an impressive growth in the past years [2], [3], mainly due to the public release of increasingly larger data sets [4]. Another changing factor was the increase in computational power, thanks to more powerful graphical processing units (GPUs) that accelerated the development of methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs). These networks are able to achieve (near) human expert diagnostic performances [5], [6], and are trained in an end-to-end fashion, eliminating the need for hand-crafted features [7].
The features learned by CNN models are optimal, in the sense that they are optimized to give the best classification performance. However, they are not easy to interpret, especially by non-experts, and the user is left without much information to understand the output of a CNN. In safety-critical medical applications, such as the one addressed in this paper, it is crucial for CADS to provide explainable outputs to physicians. Otherwise, an incorrect diagnosis may be rendered, incurring in high costs for both the patient and the practitioner. Our work aims to address this issue through the design of an explainable CADS.
Various approaches have been proposed by the machine learning community to improve the explainability of a CNN, most of them focused on inspecting the features learned by the model. Two popular strategies are class activation maps (CAMs [8] or Grad-CAMs [9]), which highlight the image regions that contribute the most to an output, and attention modules [10] that are trained to guide the CNN towards the most discriminative features. It is also possible to inspect each filter learned by the CNN [11], [12]. Most visualization methods are applied only during the inference phase and after the network is fully trained. On the other hand, there are methods try to simultaneously improve the explainability of the CNN and its performance. In this case, the network is trained to jointly perform a set of related tasks. These multi-task networks learn better features that capture common and discriminative properties [13], [14].
In this work we propose to combine multi-task CNNs with visualization methods to develop an explainable CADS for skin cancer diagnosis. Towards this goal we will take into account a property of skin lesions that remains relatively unexplored in the literature: their inherent hierarchical structure. Lesions are progressively organized by dermatologists into various classes, according to their origin (melanocytic or non-melanocytic) and degree of malignancy (malignant or benign), until a differential diagnosis is reached (see Fig. 1). In order to determine these sequential classes, dermatologists screen the lesions for the presence of localized dermoscopic criteria [15]. Various dermoscopic criteria, such as streaks or blood vessels, are highly correlated with the origin of the lesion (e.g., melanocytic for the streaks and non-melanocytic for blood vessels), while a more detailed assessment of the structures makes it possible for dermatologists to perform a differential diagnosis based on the following medical facts: (i) irregular streaks are a sign of melanoma, but regular ones are a hallmark of the reed and spitz nevi; (ii) arborizing vessels are associated with basal cell carcinomas, while the hairpin ones are more common in seborrheic/benign keratosis.Download : Download high-res image (83KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Hierarchical organization of skin lesions.
Expert dermatologists are able to achieve better diagnosis by understanding the aforementioned similarities and differences between the various lesions. Thus, it is expected that CADS would also benefit from this knowledge. In this work, we will develop a deep learning based CADS that makes hierarchical decisions about the lesion (multi-task) at the following levels: origin (melanocytic/non-melanocytic), degree of malignancy (benign/malignant), and differential diagnosis (e.g., melanoma, basal cell carcinoma, benign keratosis), where each decision is conditioned on the previous one. To mimic the localized analysis and improve the explainability of the model, we will take advantage of attention modules. Attention will guide the model towards the most discriminative regions and features of the lesion, for each of the decision levels.
Our work demonstrates the advantages of combining a multi-task CNN with attention modules. First, we prove that an explainable hierarchical model can be efficiently trained without the need to add external data, even with a small training set (2000 images), and generalizes well to new images. The model achieves competitive diagnostic results on public data sets, especially when compared with more complex methods based on ensembles of CNNs. Second, the visualization of the attention modules allows an easy interpretation of the correct and incorrect diagnosis, increasing the safety of the model. Finally, the importance of the attention module is further supported by our robustness experiments, where we visualize the impact of various image transformations. We believe that our work is a relevant contribution towards the design of more efficient, robust, and safe deep learning models.
