For many people, online shopping has become an essential part of life. Global Internet purchases/sales increased in 2018 to $2.86 trillion from $2.43 trillion the previous year (Young 2019). Along with Internet market growth is the development of the advanced information system that functions as the backbone of global e-commerce. Interactive marketing technology has increased online shoppers' expectations for highly engaging, time-sensitive, and personalized shopping (Elliott 2019). As more consumers shop online, the Internet has become a competitive marketplace where retailers must develop effective online visual merchandising strategies to create an e-shopping environment and deliver an engaging and pleasant customer experience. Consumer neuroscience involves studying consumers' neurophysiological responses to reveal the underlying brain mechanism of consumer behavior, which offers valuable insights that the traditional survey method could not do (Casado-Aranda, Dimoka, & Sánchez-Fernández 2019). Specifically, Neuro-Information-System (NeuroIS) is a newly developing field that emphasizes the use of neuroscience to inform theoretical development and practical implications in the management of information system design and usability (Dimoka 2012).
In terms of online shopping, emerging sensory-enabling technologies have presented consumers with convenient and enjoyable shopping experiences (Petit, Velasco, & Spence 2019). A major difference between online shopping and in-store shopping is whether customers can physically examine the products of interest. Without being able to physically examine the product, shoppers experience higher levels of uncertainty and perceived risk when making purchase decisions online (Childers et al., 2002, Peck, 2011). Therefore, providing sensory-rich information on websites is one of the most effective ways to convey the important product details and reduce concerns associated with buying the product. Of the products consumers purchase online, apparel is among the most popular categories worldwide (Statista.com 2019). In the case of experiential products like apparel, sensory-engaging presentation strategies that provide an experience analogous to tactile shopping may be effective at reducing perceived risk and increasing the likelihood of a pleasurable shopping experience (Cano et al., 2017, Fiore et al., 2005, Kim and Forsythe, 2008). Prior studies suggest that websites can use various visual presentations, such as image zooming, product rotation, 3D product presentation, or virtual fitting rooms to increase consumers' positive responses such as positive product attitudes and purchase intentions (Algharabat et al., 2017, Kim and Forsythe, 2008, Park et al., 2008, Petit et al., 2019). For instance, Vonkeman, Verhagen, and Van Dolen (2017) found that product presentation technologies may affect online impulse buying by providing a sense of local presence, while Algharabat et al. (2017) found that the virtual product experience positively moderates the relationships between consumers' attitudes towards products and user satisfaction. Moreover, using mobile touch screens may increase psychological ownership and endowment (Brasel & Gips 2014). These studies suggest that sensory-enabling presentation strategies may evoke different psychological and physical responses among consumers. With virtual reality and augmented reality technologies becoming increasingly popular, the purpose of the present study is twofold. First, we attempt to find out if the sensory-enabling presentations affect consumer neurophysiological responses differently when making purchase decisions. Second, we attempt to identify the most effective product presentation strategy in the context of online apparel shopping and inform best practices in the field of online interactive marketing. In the field of Internet shopping, there have been numerous studies in the marketing literature that have adopted the stimulus–organism–response (SOR) framework to investigate consumer online shopping behaviors. A search on Google Scholar for internet shopping SOR model presented about 15,000 results as of February 2020. However, using survey or behavioral data, many questions still remain unanswered concerning how shoppers internally process the various information cues (e.g., product photos, videos, consumer reviews, etc.) to aid their purchase decisions.
This exploratory study was designed to answer three research questions. First, what are the neuro correlates recruited to make a purchase decision in the three most common online visual presentation strategies (i.e., picture, zooming, and rotation views)? Second, which type of visual presentation produces the most accurate neural activation pattern on predicting the purchase decisions? Third, is there a superior neural pattern that can be used to predict purchase decisions across different visual presentation conditions? The present study utilizes functional Magnetic Resonance Imagining (fMRI) to harvest the internal affective and cognitive process signals, including conscious and unconscious value processing (Motoki, Sugiura, & Kawashima 2019). The research findings contribute to the marketing literature in three ways: first, identifying the brain networks that have the prediction validity of consumer purchase decisions; second, providing empirical evidence of the effective online visual merchandising strategy in the context of online apparel shopping; third, offering theoretical inferences of the heuristic information processing of purchase decision-making (Chaiken & Trope 1999).
