The identification of network attack elements is an important part of network security in the network system. After network data streams are collected at different locations in the network system, the types of network security elements to which they belong must be accurately identified to provide a basis for the next network security situation assessment. The identification of network security elements is mainly based on the attributes and characteristics of the collected data, which are classified into normal, Dos, Probe, R2L, U2R and other categories according to the characteristics of the attack [1], [2]. In the classification process, the most important step is feature recognition, which is also the research focus for researchers. As a new technology, machine learning technology is now widely used in the field of attack recognition. Researchers use algorithms such as Naive Bayes [3], Support Vector Machines [4], Random Forest [5] or DBSCAN [6], and X-means [7] to build models based on various characteristics to perform network traffic analysis and classification. Although these recognition models have better detection effect and higher recognition rate in the laboratory environment, all of them rely too much on artificially selected features. Features are commonly set by researchers through experience before the model is established. Common angles include network flow attributes, time, behaviour, etc. Reasonable features can effectively improve the performance of the model, but manual selection has higher requirements for the designer’s prior knowledge, and fixed features provide an opportunity for attackers. Attackers can use the idea of adversarial machine learning to change the related characteristics of the attack behaviour in a targeted manner to evade the detection of the model. Cui et al. [8] note that attackers can eliminate space similarity by injecting specific data packets and data flow noise into the network traffic and adding random time delay to the communication to eliminate the time similarity. Therefore, how to establish a deep learning model for network attack recognition that does not depend on features remains a subject worthy of study.
In recent years, deep learning technology has been widely applied to identify network attack behaviours and has achieved certain results. Among them, Wen et al. [9] proposed the use of a multi-layer feed forward neural network with a back-propagation mechanism to build a classifier and improved the algorithm so that it could dynamically adjust the learning rate of the model when updating the weights. Wu et al. [10] combined CNN and LSTM to construct a botnets detection system based on a deep learning method, which extracts network traffic features from two dimensions of time and space; Wang et al. [11] used convolutional neural networks to learn the spatial features of network traffic and image classification technology to identify malicious traffic and achieved high accuracy. Wang et al. [12] proposed using CNN to learn the characteristics of network traffic and using graph classification to achieve traffic classification. Torres et al. [13] converted the traffic features into characters, used the recurrent neural network to learn the time series features of the character strings for the traffic anomaly detection experiments and achieved good results. Yang et al. [1] proposed a classification model and a training method based on the radial basis neural network. The training sample error is used to construct the cost function to obtain the minimum value of the cost function and improve the classification accuracy. Alsirhani et al. [3] designed a classifier for IRC botnets using J48, Naive Bayes, and Bayesian network algorithms, which has a low missing report rate. Al-Jarrah et al. [14] proposed a new randomized data segmentation learning model, which used an improved forward selection and sorting technique to filter redundant and irrelevant features from the feature set, and reduced the bulky training dataset by the data pruning method based on Tyson polygon. Ma et al. [15] used deep neural networks to perform network traffic anomaly detection experiments on the KDD99 dataset. Saad et al. [16] compared the performance of five classifiers such as SVM and KNN in real-time detection for P2P botnets. Niyaz et al. [17] used the deep belief network to study anomaly detection for the NSL-KDD dataset. Koning et al. [18] proposed a large-scale high-speed detection system for NetFlow data. By adopting a random forest model to dynamically select features, the missing report rate and false positive rate can be adaptively balanced in different application scenarios.
Unlike the aforementioned existing work, this paper combines various deep learning algorithms to build a model, gradually abstracts through multi-layer neural networks, and automatically learns the network traffic characteristics from two dimensions (time and space) to identify large-scale complex attack behaviours. The model recognizes the data features in network data messages by constructing a spatial feature learning module, adopts the time feature learning mode to learn the time-series features of the network attack behaviour, reduces the prior knowledge of artificial features, protocols, and topology by attack recognition, uses the spatiotemporal attention fusion mechanism to construct the spatiotemporal dependence information in network attack behaviours, and uses a segmentation strategy to construct an attack behaviour recognition framework. The results are applicable to static networks of the traditional Ethernet and dynamic networks such as IIoT.
The contributions of this article are as follows.
(1) An identification strategy through joint learning of spatiotemporal features is presented for unknown attack behaviours that do not have obvious characteristics, are difficult to find, and have high concealment.
(2) The DLLSTM algorithm can reduce the dependence of the prior knowledge of artificial features, protocols, and topology.
(3) The spatial attention was fused with the temporal attention to establish the spatiotemporal dependence of cyber-attack behaviours and distinguish the importance of spatiotemporal features.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. Section 2 contains a design of Double-layer LSTM spatio-temporal learning model. The fusion and calculation of space–time attention is presented in Section 3. Section 4 explains the identification classification of network attacks. Section 5 contains the experimental results and a discussion. Section 6 concludes this article.
