Digital manufacturing has been introduced in industry to reduce the time of developing new products and the cost. Such computer aided design technology allows manufacturers to cater to the needs of customers, improve the quality of the products and adjusting product design according to market feedback. As a highly promising technology, the digital manufacturing process has been widely adopted in industry. It is thus important to investigate the effects of the computer aided manufacturing process on the production. Recently, a variety of digital manufacturing models have been designed [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. In the 1960s and 1970s, the inventory control and material requirements planning (MRP) systems were introduced to the industry. In [7], Umble et al. integrated tools that are capable of providing capacity and sales planning functionalities, scheduling and forecasting into MRP. In order to make the production more competitive and efficient, process planning is introduced to guide the sequence of production process [8]. Controlling system based on computer program has been integrated into the process planning to create a consistent, processing procedure. Such a computer-aided process planning (CAPP) system is an essential component of CIM environment [9]. Kim and Duffie [10] designed a discrete time dynamic system to model the closed-loop process planning control and performed a thorough analysis. They show that such a control is capable of improving response to disturbances caused by rush orders and periodic fluctuations in capacity. In [11], Veda et al. proposed a simultaneous process planning and scheduling approach based on evolutionary artificial neural networks to solve the conflict between process planing and a production schedule. In [12], Baldwin et al. designed an enhancing simulation software for digital manufacturing systems.
Supply chain plays an important role in the production of automobile and aircraft. Investigations indicate that up to 60 percent of the value of these products comes from suppliers. Efficient computer aided digital manufacturing systems will help ensure continuous and efficient supply [13], [14]. Over the past decade, the design, analysis and modeling of supply chain have been intensively studied in the literature. In [15], Hou et al. proposed an integrated system with production, inventory and distribution being integrated into the model in a two-stage supply chain network. In [16], Zhang et al. established a novel supply chain network model with nonlinear complementarity formulation and carried out qualitative analysis. In [17], Nikel et al. considered a multi-period stochastic supply chain network under financial decision and risk management. A three-phase multi-product supply chain network model was studied in [18], where a genetic algorithm method is used to solve the design problems in multi-product multi-phase supply chain network. “Bullwhip effect” and its consequence have been investigated in the literature. It is shown that such effects are responsible for chaotic behaviors of many supply chain models. Chaos theory has been used to study finance, economics and management [19]. In [20], Huang et al. investigated the bullwhip effect with stochastic control and H∞ control. In [21], Zhang et al. designed control laws to synchronize two chaotic supply chain systems with bullwhip effect by using radial basis function. In [22], Goksu et al. used active control method to achieve the synchronization of chaotic supply chain management systems.
A supply chain with digital manufacturing system may display complex dynamic behaviors and the control and synchronization of such a system may have potential applications in the management of real-word supply chain systems. In this paper, we design a supply chain model with computer aided design to investigate the dynamics of such a system. We design an active controller and a linear feedback controller to control the chaotic supply chain system and synchronize two supply chain systems, respectively. Numerical simulations are provided to illustrate the effectiveness and applicability of the proposed methods.
The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce a demand-driven supply chain model with computer aided manufacturing process. In Section 3, we design feed-back controllers to synchronize two such systems with different initial conditions. In Section 4, we consider the stabilization of the supply chain model. Conclusions are presented in Section 5.
