In the field of general artificial intelligence (GAI), the cognitive architectures (CAs) came up with the purpose of solving problems through human-like reasoning. To achieve this level of reasoning, CAs seek for modeling the human mind by taking into account a multidisciplinary approach mostly based on cognitive sciences. In general, regardless of the chosen approach, CAs separate cognition in different functions such as attention, memory, perception, emotions, planning, motivation, etc. The amount of desired cognitive functions depends on how general or specific it is pretended to be.
From all the existing cognitive functions, Memory is one of the most important, and it is present in almost all the CAs. It is the process by which knowledge is encoded,stored and retrieved. It can be divided based on the time course of storage into long-term and short-term memory (Schacter & Wagner, 2013). The long-term memory is responsible to store a large amount of information during longer periods of time and is classified into declarative and non-declarative. The declarative (explicit) memory manages facts and events, and the non-declarative (implicit) memory manages skills and habit learning (Milner et al., 1998, Squire et al., 1993). Short-term memory, also called working memory refers to the capacity to mantain temporarily a limited amount of information in mind, which can then be used to support several abilities like learning, reasoning, and preparation for action (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974).
Both types of memory are regularly considered in CAs as independent and they interact just to use working memory as the output of long-term memory. It means they use working memory as a simple temporary storage and not as a dynamic system. Thus, this work focuses on the proposal of a cognitive architecture that depicts a better interaction between the declarative memory and working memory for declarative knowledge. This proposal is designed to be part of a broader cognitive architecture project. This project is inspired by neurosciences and psychology mainly, and developed under a modular approach: it involves the obtaining and prediction of behavior by means of the integration of different Cognitive Functions (CFs) that interact among them.
We start showing in Section 2 the most relevant cognitive architectures endowed with working memory. Then in Section 3, we present both the theoretical models and neuroscientific evidence which ground this proposal. In Section 4 Computational DWM model, 5 Implementation, we provide a detailed description of our computational architecture and software implementation. Finally, Sections 6 Case study, 7 Results, 8 Discussion explains the case study used for the evaluation, the obtained results, and the discussion of the current work.
