Rising Stars are the persons who have low performance at the start of their career but have the potential to become experts in their field shortly [1]. Rising star prediction is very useful to know the impact of a recently joined member on the future performance of an organization. In an organization, their members can be ranked by analyzing their past statistics but in the case when a member has only spent few years in an organization and there is not much statistics to rank him, in such case concept of the rising star is very useful because in rising star prediction a member is predicted as a rising star or not rising star by finding whether a member’s performance increase or decrease while working with senior and expert teammates of the same organization.
There has been some work done in finding the experts in author networks. PubRank algorithm [1] explored rising stars in author’s network. StarRank algorithm is presented by [2] which is better than PubRank because StarRank considers the author’s contribution based on mutual influence and dynamic publication venue scores, whereas PubRank only considers author’s mutual influence and static ranking of journals or conferences. The evolution of authors over time is presented by [3], they define four types of author evolution as rising stars, declining authors, authors with stable publication rate and well-established authors. Machine learning models were used by [4] for rising star prediction in co-author network. They proposed several types of features and fed these features into machine learning algorithms. They ranked the authors based on the feature scores. Weighted Mutual Influence Rank (WMIRank) method is proposed by [5] for finding rising stars in co-author networks. WMIRank method is based on co-author’s citations based on mutual influence, co-author’s order based mutual influence and co-author venue’s citations based mutual influence. The impact of senior scholars on junior ones is studied by [6], their study revealed that a junior author can become an expert if had a chance to work with a senior and expert author. Their study also revealed that if an author does not get a chance to work with the expert and senior authors, still the junior author can become an expert soon by his hard work. Bibliometric and collaborative information of scholars were used by [7] for extracting and analyzing profiles of scholars. Inner factors were used by [8] to evaluate rising stars in a heterogeneous social network. The influence of co-authors and the quality cited papers have been used by [9] to predict academic rising stars. Detailed discussion on rising stars in bibliometric networks can be found in [10]. Recent research on the application of rising stars to predict rising business manager is carried out by [11]. Ranking of cricket teams based on ranking algorithms is presented by [12]. Ref. [13] discuss about falsely predicted rising stars. In sports, the concept of the rising star has only been applied to the game of cricket [14], they used machine learning techniques for the rising star prediction in the domain of batting and bowling. They used co-players, team and opposite team features. The predicted rising star players are ranked with respect to feature scores.
Predicting rising stars in the game of basketball is a machine learning problem. For a given player and set of features the objective is to predict whether a player is a rising star or not. Prior to predict rising stars we labeled players as rising stars and not rising stars on the basis of their efficiency. After labeling the players different basketball statistics of the co-players are used as attributes to machine learning models.
We introduced three types of co-players, players of same team in same game, player of opponent team in same game and combination of players of same and opponent team appeared in same game. The objective of proposing these three types of co-players is to explore which type of co-players features achieve better accuracy. We used existing machine learning models and improved the accuracy of these models through feature engineering. We classified features by type and by size and also further categories of these features were created. To conduct experiment we created three datasets from the scratch. Extensive experiments are done with three dataset in order to examine the significance of different categories of features and machine learning models. Rising stars are also compared with NBA Most Improved Players.
To the best of our knowledge this is the first attempt of predicting rising stars in game of basketball. In other sports the rising star prediction is applied in the game of cricket [14], they consider those players as co-players who play in some common time span, the limitation of their concept of co-player is that the co-players who played in some common time span might be possible not appeared in same games as well. We consider only those players as co-players who appeared in the actual games played by rising star players.
Main contributions of this paper are:

•Three types of co-players are introduced in this study. The first type of co-players are those players who appeared with a player in same game and belong to same team. The second type of co-players are those who appeared with a player in same game but belong to opposite team. The third type of co-players are those who appeared with a player in same game (include both same and opponent team players). The aim of presenting these three types of co-players is to examine how much each type of co-player is effective in predicting rising stars.•Derived features along with their mathematical formulation are presented. These features are derived from players traditional game statistics. The aim of derived features is to improve the results of machine learning models for rising star prediction. Features are categorized by type and size and these are further divided into sub-types. Features categorized by type are further divided into “basic”, “shooting” and “derived” feature types. Features categorized by size are further divided into “all”, “selected” and “derived” feature types. The effectiveness of each category of feature is examined on different datasets.•The three datasets used in this study are constructed by us and are not available anywhere. Each dataset consists of player name, different features of co-players and class as rising star or not rising star. The first dataset that we call Dataset A consist features of those co-players that belong to the player team. The second dataset that we call Dataset B consists of features of those co-players that belong to opponent team. The third type of dataset that we call Dataset C consists of features of co-players that belong to both same and opponent team. In future we will provide these datasets on GitHub or Kaggle forum for experiment and research purposes.
The rest of the paper is organized as, Section 2 discuss basic concepts of basketball and Section 3 discuss the related work. Proposed method that comprise of machine learning techniques, co-player selection criteria, features for rising star prediction and mathematical formulation of derived features are discussed in Section 4. Details of experiments is discussed in Section 5. Section 6 discuss conclusion and future work.
