Embedded network applications send multimedia content (audio and images) over more wired or wireless networks. Control applications and sensor networks are additional areas, ideally for devices that join the network. Since IP networks are the supreme of all systems, it must communicate using such protocols, so more or less to the Internet for communication IP protocol stacks. Connection. Many network embedded systems are connected to the network. However, protocol achievement is often evident for the IP protocol suite, which requires a lot of "heavyweight" memory resources and processing power. IP protocol, it understands that would require a lot of memory lead to a large microprocessor. IP protocol stack, in this case, performed using less memory, can select a small microprocessor. It is not only a generated system to manufacture cheaper; using an IP protocol allows the whole class to communicate with the smaller embedded systems. Microprocessor increases, whereas IP protocol using less memory, then, can achieve more complex applications.
English, education has been used in business in science. Therefore, it has a global demand. Speech recognition of English also has become a popular and active area of research. Speech recognition is used to translate the words that the people have spoken on my computer to recognize them. Recognition usually involves extracting the pattern from the digitized speech samples, use the appropriate data models to represent them. Most of the speech recognition system has been classified as an independent or continuous speech. It does not require an isolated word recognition continuous speech recognition but requires a short pause between each spoken word. Such continuous speech recognition is very difficult. Besides, it can be divided into the speaker of dependence and independence. Using a mathematical calculation to determine its contents, these patterns compare them to each other. The main challenge in speech recognition will include changes in the shape of the same word spoken by different local and non-local speakers in English. There are everywhere embedded systems, hundreds of thousands of people every year production and the computer's personal computer, laptop, and workstation, not surprising that it is bundled with the desktop computer, such as a mainframe or server. These are consumer electronics, home application (microwave oven, machine, thermostats, home security system, machine, answer the lighting system), office automation (fax, copier, printer and scanner), a variety of such companies general cash register is discovered in an electronic device or card reader and automation equipment.
Web services are based on distributed object communication technology. It is the first successful attempt to provide a means to exchange information between distributed applications in heterogeneous environments. However, Instead of using the object-oriented paradigm, the Web Services Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). Service brokers, by the available service providers and service requests, play a role, such as the publication in these places repository. Located behind, service provider can have the requested service through the service to which it has been requested. Vocabulary education is currently an area of China's education has been notified by the description of the significant corpus analysis; there may be an activity of demand. Specifically, Academic English and vocabulary teaching of English, courses for a particular purpose, have been informed from the general academic and creation of subject-specific new words in the corpus. At the same time, apart from vocabulary instruction in the paradigm to move from words of isolated education, more emphasis on the learner's exposure to the context in terms of real meaning.
Such calculation unit, an address section, building elements such as the control unit and the memory management is complex network applications, including the correct evaluation of the computational power of digital signal processing, such as IP voice system, for using black fins series processors it is a thing. Benefits of LWIP protocol stack for several operating system primitives. Such scheduling, semaphores, good understanding of the operating system's kernel function, such as memory management, is necessary to write the software required for network applications.
