There are many reasons that short-term and long-term weather forecasts affect our decision making. Daily weather approximations of components such as air temperature, humidity, and wind speed are important for practical situations. Generally, long term weather forecasts deal with partial differential equations that can be solved by numerical methods. Methods of solving weather forecast problems numerically typically involve divided differences, tensor products, finite elements, finite differences, and finite volumes. Another technique to solve such problems is the meshless method. Using the meshless method, the problem of interpolation may be considered over a set of scattered points without any preconditioned structure. For the climate problem, the structure of scattered points is the distribution of weather stations in a specific region. For our study, we consider the weather station data in Alberta, Canada. (See Fig. 1(a).)Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Distribution of Weather Stations in Alberta, Canada .
Let X={x1,⋯,xn} be the set of the locations of all stations in the region Ω⊂R2. Temperature, humidity and wind speed are each a function of the station location in the region, name it f. The values of function f over the set of stations are known as fi,=f(xi), for i=1,⋯,n. (See Fig. 1(b).)
To solve the weather daily data interpolation problem, we need to approximate the values of f over all points of Ω. So, for an arbitrary x ∈ Ω we need to approximate f(x).
The question is whether to use all points xi in Ω for approximating f(x) (i.e. global methods) or, alternatively, consider a subset of points in a local neighborhood of x. When a data point xi changes, it is commonly expected to get a local modification of the approximating function; therefore, local methods are preferred over global methods. Additionally, global methods require more computations than local methods.
For the local method, a neighborhood is defined for each data point, and locations within the neighborhood will be used for the approximation of that data point. The challenge is the definition of a proper neighborhood for each point x. The structure of this neighborhood can affect the accuracy and the cost of computations. There are two approaches to defining a local domain. The first approach defines a disk of specific radius as the neighborhood without constraining the number of points in that neighborhood, while with the second approach, a predetermined number of points are considered as the neighborhood. Local meshless methods such as local Radial Basis Functions (RBF) [55], Kernel-based and reproducing kernel approximation methods [20], and Moving Least Squares (MLS) [31] are examples of the first approach, while k-Nearest Neighborhood (KNN) [4], [47] and the local least squares method [10], [11] are examples of the second one.
In the context of daily weather data approximation, Inverse Distance Weighting (IDW) has been widely used. This method is a modified version of the Shepard Interpolation method [50]. IDW is a global method where closer points have a greater effect on a specific location’s approximation than points farther away.
It is clear that daily weather interpolation at a specific point is inherently a local problem, so we use local MLS. To use local methods for daily weather approximation at a given x in the domain, the following issues should be considered. First, in methods such as KNN, the effects of all k nearest points of x are the same regardless of their distances to x. Second, in methods such as MLS and RBF [5], the radius of the disk neighborhood of x should be specified as a predefined value. Additionally, the RBF method is related to a parameter named “shape parameter” and the approximating function is very sensitive with respect to this parameter.
In this paper, we introduce a novel method for defining the neighborhood of points to improve weather forecast approximation accuracy without considering a predefined number of data points in its neighborhood. This neighborhood can be applied for the approximation of a function using any kind of local methods, especially for a meshless method such as MLS, that needs a local support weight function. We then find and compare several local neighborhoods by applying them to the weather data of Alberta in 2018 and 2019. We introduce three methods for constructing a local neighborhood that does not require specification of a predefined value. Specifically, we use an ellipsoidal domain rather than a disk domain to support the weight function. In an application of these methods to daily weather data, we show that the approximations of a function by using these neighborhoods have acceptable approximations based on Root Mean Squares (RMS) error and Mean Absolute Errors (MAE).
For approximating the function at any given point, we must determine what the most impactful points in its neighborhood are, how these points are distributed in that neighborhood, and the number of points there for a local interpolation. In this paper, we introduce new localization methods to address these challenges. These localizations have ellipsoidal structures rather than spherical shape, and contain the points with the most impact on computation. Such an asymmetric local neighborhood improves the approximation accuracy in comparison to other methods.
The rest of this paper has been organized as follows. Section 2 contains a compact history of related works. In Section 3, we present some basic tools in our work including IDW and MLS methods for interpolation, various localization methods, and the Mahalanobis distance. Section 4 contains our definition of two new types of elliptical quantiles based on generalized covariance and the Mahalanobis distance. Our model is described in Section 5. In Section 6, the results of applying MLS and using our new ellipsoid neighborhoods are presented. Lastly, the conclusions are given in Section 7.
