Recent advances in drone technology have resulted in widespread field use for a variety of military and civilian applications. For example, smaller vehicles, called Micro Aerial Vehicles (MAVs), also known as drones, have been utilized for visual search tasks in rugged, potentially dangerous environments to find missing persons as well as to monitor wildfires (Adams et al., 2009; Goodrich et al., 2009). Although the term MAV originally referred to a vehicle less than six inches in diameter, it can now refer to a broader range of small drone systems.
For these smaller, portable unmanned vehicle systems (UAVs), the paradigm has shifted from one where a pilot (or team of operators) controls a vehicle remotely from thousands of miles away to one where the person on the ground can directly use the system's capabilities in a local area. The user interface technology has also shifted toward small, portable handheld devices (Funk, 2018; Merrell, 2018; Williams, 2007). By allowing the user to obtain immediate and current information about his or her surroundings, such systems are ideal for local observation and surveillance tasks, whether on the battlefield, in a disaster area, or for scientific observation.
Recent legislation has opened commercial operations to small drones under 55 lbs (14 CFR 107, 2016) so there is increasing use of these systems in the civilian sector. Organizations such as first responders, news agencies, commercial entities, and hobbyists have expressed interest in taking advantage of the capabilities drones offer. However, the widespread use of MAV systems will be limited unless a few key hurdles are overcome, namely improved usability and support for safe operation in dynamic environments. This paper addresses these challenges.
In this paper, we extend previous work on MAV user interfaces by presenting techniques for supporting obstacle awareness and collision avoidance using visual and haptic mechanisms on a small mobile device. We introduce the Collision and Obstacle Detection and Avoidance (CODA) system which incorporates these techniques in a working MAV controller. We demonstrate the feasibility of our approach through the design and development of an actual system that assists MAV users in preventing collisions in real-world environments with only three minutes of training. A technical demonstration is discussed that shows how CODA can be integrated into an existing user interface on a mobile device, and support navigation and visual search tasks in a real-world outdoor environment.
Lastly, empirical results from a user evaluation study with 35 participants provide evidence that CODA can make users more aware of their proximity to obstacles and result in fewer crashes in people who had mastered the task. In addition, this study found that scores on a mental rotation test were predictive of the number of collisions occurring during the mission. With this work, we advance understanding of how to make MAV systems usable enough to operate safely, effectively, and consistently, in order to facilitate wider adoption of MAV technology.
