During the last few decades, the ever-rising progress in information and communication technology has impacted many aspects of humans’ lives globally. Online services through Internet technology are the inseparable parts of our everyday activities. The network infrastructures play an important role in making such services widely available for responding to people’s needs and requests [1]. Continuing the advancement of technology in the network’s field has led to the emergence of a new architecture known as software-defined network (SDN), which is able to meet the growing needs of users [2], [3]. SDN is relatively a new architecture that separates the data plane from the control plane and uses protocols such as OpenFlow [4] for communication between data plane and control plane layers. In the SDN architecture, the control plane is the intelligent part of the network and is able to manage not only the SDN switches in the data plane but also all behaviors of the network during runtime [2], [5]. In the data plane, the SDN switches play a key role since all of the packets are parsed and extracted by them. The main goal of creating the SDN is to address the limitations of the conventional network (none-SDN networks) to provide better flexibility in network management, efficient controlling traffic, and high programmability with a great deal of adaptability and automation [6]. SDN has earned the consideration of scholars for future-generation networks because of its capabilities.
As mentioned earlier, SDN offers advantages connected to its architecture that are different from conventional network architectures. In a less positive way, however, SDN has faced security threats and vulnerability issues in its network such as the distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack [7], [8]. Obviously, there have been many malicious behaviors and attacks that aim to damage a network’s services and resources [8], [9]. As with any other network, the SDN architecture should be safeguarded against threats and intrusions. To overcome the SDN security issues, the application of an intrusion detection system (IDS) has been widely advocated as a sensible solution [9], [10], [11]. An IDS efficiently assists to mitigate malicious behaviors and attacks such as DoS/DDoS, IP spoofing, and malware in the network, and helps to detect and warn for unauthorized or unwanted access to the system resources [12], [9].
Merging an IDS into SDN is potentially one of the viable methods to provide a more secure SDN network. The SDN has this ability to provide viable opportunities for creating a much effective intrusion detection approach. Besides, it can merge the threat detection approaches in the SDN network via the specifications of SDN like its programmability. For instance, a potential factor connected with intrusion detection is the packet’s statistics in a flow in the data plane and forwarding extracted field of the packet to the Flow tables; therefore, SDN can use these characteristics for intrusion detection [13], [14]. We called our approach the Kangaroo-based since attack announcing propagates from one IDS over multiple IDSs, simultaneously making attack-related announcements to the control plane. Moreover, the kangaroo-based approach can facilitate and accelerate attack announcing during intrusion detection. IDSs in KIDS play a vital role and have the main role because IDSs not only can detect an attack and report to the SDN controller but also announce to other IDSs via consecutive jumps like a kangaroo. When one of the IDSs detect an attack, it initiates the reporting to the SDN controller, and Simultaneously that IDS starts to announce the identified attack to other IDSs in the runtime as consecutive jumps like a kangaroo. Also, during runtime, the kangaroo-based approach can predict which zones are involved in attacks via considering the destination IP addresses and routing information after attack detection. Then, attack-aware IDS start for attack announcing as jumps Kangaroo in those zones. Finally, other IDSs in different zones that did not directly involve with the attack will become aware of that attack. As a result, the kangaroo-based approach contributes to improved SDN-based architecture’s scalability and efficiency in this work. By and large, KIDS uses both the merits of flow-based IDS for detecting anomaly behavior and a packet-based IDS approach for finding an attack based on the packet structure compared with existing approaches that used just the flow-based or packet-based approaches. This technique has positive effects on intrusion detection and increases security efficiency in the KIDS. KIDS is a flexible architecture for detecting attacks with scalable anomaly detection and malicious flows compared with existing approaches. As a matter of fact, in the KIDS architecture, IDS uses information that it can obtain from packet parser [15], and the Flow tables [16] during runtime in the SDN switch. For having scalability in this architecture, we apply a zone-based structure in which each zone consists of several SDN switches. As a result, IDS in each zone of the network can do intrusion detection activities without any dependency to work separately from other IDSs, enhancing the scalability. We define a specific algorithm for a sampling rate of packet flows in the KIDS and consider the mathematic network model to minimize the rate of lost malicious traffic flow. The contributions of this paper are as follows:

•We propose a novel IDS system as the kangaroo-based intrusion detection approach on SDN networks. The proposed architecture, KIDS, is working in both the data plane and control plane for both attack detecting and announcing via applying consecutive jumps like a kangaroo.•One of the significant issues in SDN is the scalability problem. KIDS architecture is applied in a zone-based structure for overcoming the scalability issue and efficiency during attack detection. We achieve scalability in both anomaly detection and the SDN network.•In KIDS, we consider not only the flow-based IDS but also the packet-based IDS approach powered by monitoring packet parser and flow tables of the SDN switch.•Our architecture employs an efficient mathematical and algorithmic network model to establish a secure SDN network and to obtain a performance metric for failure inspection of suspicious traffic as the captivate-fail rate.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give the related work in the IDS and SDN domain. Next, in Section 3, the proposed kangaroo intrusion detection system (KIDS) is defined and presented with its architecture. The experimental setup is presented in Section 4 that gives information about simulation and the configuration for our evaluation. In Section 5, we present the results. Finally, the concluding remarks and future work are given in Section 6.
