Interconnection networks have been studied in depth for many decades to analyze their essential features such as embedding capabilities, reliability, efficiency, fault tolerance, high simulation fidelity, transmission delay, and small diameter. Since the interconnection network possesses complex connections, simulation problem helps to interpret networks and hence it emphasizes the need and importance of graph embedding in parallel system performance. The network simulation technique in computer network designs can be mathematically formed as a graph embedding problem whereby a parallel algorithm written for one network is simulated into another by optimizing some constraints of the networks. Graph embedding has a wide range of applications in areas such as VLSI layout, structural engineering, link prediction, image clustering, network compression, parallel and distributed processing systems, graph classification and visualization [8], [11], [13], [24].
A complete network is a fully connected topology in which all the hubs are connected to each other by a link. Such a network is extremely useful in broadcasting and packet switching. In graph theory, it is structured as a complete graph. Furthermore, for maintaining better control over each vertex, it has been suggested to replace each vertex of a complete graph with a set of independent vertices and permitting the inherent structural connectivity to all the vertices in that independent set as in the original vertex. Such a complex network is called the complete multipartite graph and studied in varieties of research problems. Moreover, it includes graphs such as star graph, (3, n)-cone graph, octahedral graph, 16-cell graph, cocktail party graph and Turán graph as special cases and some of them are shown in Fig. 1. Also, every strongly regular integral circulant graph is either a complete multipartite graph or its complement [7].
A lot of research work has been devoted to the grid, which is a unit distance graph with vertex set embedded on some Euclidean space Rn. Grid embedding has great importance in data structures mainly to keep the structure from clustering together for a machine learning system and it plays as a powerful tool in the field of data analytics, visualization and prediction. In particular, the problem of embedding different types of networks into grid structures plays an important role in VLSI circuit designs. Moreover, grid related structures like cylinder and torus have also been considered and all such problems pose many challenges in the fields of theoretical computer science and communication engineering due to computational complexities. For instance, the optimal layout of binary hypercube into grid has been computed in linear time [15] while in the case of cylinder and torus posted as conjectures [4]. On the contrary, the optimal layouts of balanced complete multipartite graph into cylinder and torus have been recently computed [18] and in the case of grid challenged as an open problem. Following this, a very recently [19], the layout of balanced complete multipartite graph into an n-dimensional grid (n≥3) was considered in which the grid size is taken as powers of 2. The above review of literature clearly indicates the importance and difficulties of obtaining the layout in the case of two dimensional grid with any size, but not as powers of 2. The main focus of the paper is to solve such a problem.Download : Download high-res image (241KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Special cases of complete multipartite graph.
On the other side, it is known that tree structure is an elementary nonlinear data structure which has been widely used in artificial intelligence and data analysis. Moreover, tree structures are also accustomed to design hierarchical like structures in data designing, information theory, and operations research problems. The embedding problem into tree structures [3], [20] has crucial applications because most problems tend to be difficult on general graphs often give simpler solutions on tree networks. The rest of the paper is read as follows:
In the next section, we give the graph theoretical terminologies which are used throughout the study. In Section 3, we give the lexicographic labeling to grid followed by circular right shift operator in order to obtain the optimal layout and in the subsequent section we embed the balanced complete multipartite graph into certain tree related structures. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 5.
