Irrigated farmlands provide about 40% of food and fiber used in the world, with increasing demand for irrigated acreage due to climate variabilities and rising food demands of the growing population (Evans and Sadler, 2008). Drought spells and rising temperatures are occurring, especially in semi-arid and arid regions of the southwestern United States, where annual evaporation and transpiration exceed the rainfall. Southwest is the hottest part of the nation (USGCRP, 2014). The United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in 2014, reported average temperatures in the southwest increased by 2 °F (1.12 °C) from 2000-2013 relative to the long-term average from 1895-2013 (US EPA, 2014 and 2017). The over-allocation of surface waters and the 20 year-long droughts have affected the Colorado River watershed (USGCRP, 2014), which is a major source of water supply for the southwest. The prolonged continuous droughts and over-allocation of the river waters may lead to an official water shortage declaration in most of the southwestern states. Though a state like Arizona has a great history of robust, innovative groundwater regulation, such a declaration may affect irrigation water supply with potential pressure on groundwater withdrawal and likely increases in prices of water rights and farm produce (Lahmers and Eden, 2018). Irrigation is a crucial component for crop production in the southwest, especially in states like Arizona, where more than 90% of croplands are irrigated, with about 74 % of the total water used in Arizona going into agriculture (Arizona Department of Water Resources, 2020). Crop production contributes significantly to the economies in the southwest, hence the need to understand advances made in irrigation water use for crop productions in terms of irrigation technology and best management practices (BMP), which includes drough-tolerant seeds selection for prudent water management.
According to (Carey and Zilberman 2002; Genius et al. 2014), developing intensive extension and educational programs on irrigation could give producers the right information to transition from unsustainable traditional irrigation practices to smart irrigation technology that may lead to water saving in agriculture. Studies have shown that reducing water withdrawals as a result of smart water use systems in agriculture could increase water supply for other uses such as municipal and environmental applications (Ward and Pulido- Velazquez, 2008; Rockström et al. 2007; Huffaker and Whittlesey 2000; Hussain et al. 2007), which could be a great strategy in mitigating water shortages. Based on this assumption, we asked the question - could the adoption of smarter irrigation methods in the southwest reduce total irrigation water use in agriculture, thus increasing water availability for other purposes such as municipal and environmental applications without compromising field crop yields?
This study aimed to elucidate a decade of trends of irrigation water use, irrigation technology, and irrigation outreach programs in the southwest, using the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) census data of 2007 and 2017 in a comparative approach. The study hypothesized no differences in irrigation water use, irrigation technology, and irrigation outreach programs in the southwestern states between 2007 and 2017.
