The Word Wide Web has changed the way in which readers search, select, and comprehend science-related information. When reading online material, readers are frequently confronted with the challenging tasks to select, comprehend, and use a multitude of complex and often inconsistent and contrary texts on the same topic. Scientists use the Word Wide Web as a platform to discuss new theories and empirical results as quickly as they are developed, which is important for academic transparency and progress, but creates a challenging information landscape for laypersons. Such an open discussion of complex scientific debates can be currently observed on the topic of the COVID-19 global pandemic. Inconsistent information on the origin, diagnosis, treatment and most important prevention of the disease have been spread on the World Wide Web leading to a diversity of information on this issue of varying origins. Even if false information or intentional disinformation spread about the COVID-19 global pandemic is disregarded, a colorful portfolio of constantly changing facts and contrary arguments remains, which have a direct influence on the health of the individual and the global society. Understanding and comprehending such a multitude of information and multiple texts requires knowledgeable readers to critically evaluate scientific content to achieve their goals (Britt, Richter, & Rouet, 2014). Research suggests that prior beliefs play an important role during selecting, comprehending, and generating information from (multiple) texts. For example, McCrudden and Barnes (2016) found that male secondary students provided more favorable evaluations of belief-consistent arguments. In addition to this belief effect on evaluation, readers have a strong tendency to select information that is in line with what they believe to be true (confirmation bias, Nickerson, 1998), comprehend textual information that is consistent with their prior beliefs to a greater extent than belief-inconsistent information (text-belief consistency effect; e.g., Eagly & Chaiken, 1993; Maier & Richter, 2013), maintain their beliefs even in the face of new information that explicitly corrects or discredits their beliefs (continued misinformation effect; e.g., Chinn & Brewer, 1993; Johnson & Seifert, 1994; Limon & Mason, 2002; Ross, Lepper, & Hubbard, 1975), and produce more belief-consistent compared to belief-inconsistent information when asked to generate arguments (myside bias; e.g. Wolfe, Britt, & Butler, 2009). These belief effects have in common a hampering effect on readers’ ability to come to a full and comprehensive understanding of controversially discussed topics.
Given the strong influence of prior beliefs on the comprehension of (multiple) texts, the present study aimed at evaluating a metacognitive strategy intervention intended to assist readers in the comprehension of multiple science-related texts and to reduce belief biases in comprehension. The development of a metacognitive strategy intervention was informed by recent research indicating that text comprehension involves not only activation and integration of textual information but also routine epistemic monitoring of text-information with pertinent and accessible knowledge and beliefs (validation, Richter, 2015; Singer, 2013). Epistemic monitoring or validation (both terms are used interchangeably in this article) refer to a regular component of comprehension during which readers automatically check the consistency of new information with currently activated knowledge and beliefs as well as currently activated information from previously read text. Such nonstrategic validation processes are one likely source of belief effects in comprehension. We conducted two experiments to test the effectiveness of a metacognitive strategy training, focusing on belief effects and validation in multiple text comprehension. In Experiment 1, the method consisted of only a minimal training intervention, which was extended and developed into a computer-based training in Experiment 2. In both experiments, a learning scenario was created that is typical for learning with multiple documents. In detail, participants read two belief-relevant texts on the same issue that took rather divergent perspectives and provided conflicting arguments on the problem. The comprehension measure targeted the individual texts and not intertextual comprehension or integration between the two texts because the text-belief consistency effect refers to the relative strength of the situation models for individual texts that take divergent perspectives and provide conflicting information (e.g., Maier & Richter, 2013).
In the next paragraphs, we first describe the processes involved in multiple text comprehension and the Two-Step Model of Validation (Richter & Maier, 2017), which was formulated to explain belief-biases in the comprehension of multiple texts. We then discuss the instructions and interventions used to foster multiple text comprehension to provide the context for the training intervention examined in the present experiments.
1.1. Cognitive processes involved in multiple text comprehensionMultiple texts comprehension is based on a variety of cognitive processes and results in different comprehension outcomes, from understanding the meaning of single texts to constructing the interrelations between texts. The MD-TRACE model (Multiple-Document Task-based Relevance Assessment and Content Extraction; Rouet & Britt, 2011) provides a depiction of the processing steps that readers need to undertake during multiple text comprehension. First, readers need to construct a task model based on their individual interpretations of the reading task, such as writing an argument or a summary. As a recent extension of the MD-TRACE model, in the RESOLV model (REading as problem SOLVing), readers not only construct a task model but also a context model, which is a representation of the social and physical environment (Rouet, Britt, & Durik, 2017). Both the MD-TRACE model and the RESOLV model assume that readers' internal resources, such as their prior knowledge and beliefs, influence the task model. In addition, the task model contains readers’ schematic plans on how to achieve the subjective reading goal based on a benefit–cost analysis. In this process, the evolving task model provides a main structure for regulatory processes, in which reading activities are chosen and monitored with regard to the achievement of the specific reading goals. Thus, the task model is also used to select information based on its perceived relevance. That is, information perceived as relevant to achieve the established reading goal is selected more often.Similar assumptions and observations have been made in research on perspective and relevance effects (e.g., Anderson & Pichert, 1978; McCrudden, Magliano, & Schraw, 2011) and on belief effects during multiple text comprehension (Maier, Richter, & Britt, 2018). For example, the goal-focusing model (McCrudden et al., 2011) proposes that personal and given intentions together form reading goals, which then influence processing and learning. Hence, similar to the assumption made in the MD-TRACE model, not only external cues (e.g., reading tasks) influence the reading goals set by readers and subsequently the attention and processing of goal-relevant information, but internal factors (e.g., beliefs) can also influence readers’ task model. The interactive relationship between given intentions and personal intentions that together form reading goals and influence processing and learning is not unique for multiple text comprehension, but is relevant for text comprehension in general (McCrudden et al., 2011).The MD-TRACE model further assumes that readers update their task product sequentially during reading. After reading, readers evaluate their outcome, that is, whether their understanding of the issue meets the task requirements they had established before reading. If readers are satisfied with the reading outcome, they will stop reading. Otherwise, they may continue to search for additional information. Similar to the task model, the evaluation of the reading outcome is assumed to be influenced by readers' internal resources such as their prior beliefs. A similar function of beliefs as epistemic gatekeeper has been discussed in the Two-Step Model of Validation (e.g., Richter & Maier, 2017), which will be discussed later. Moreover, the idea that readers evaluate their reading outcome is also related to the standard of coherence concept that determines whether readers are satisfied with their reading outcome or continue with strategic comprehension (van den Broek, Beker, & Oudega, 2015). In detail, readers’ standard of coherence determines when readers are satisfied with their understanding in a particular reading situation. If this standard for sufficient comprehension is not met, readers then engage in additional strategic processing to meet the standard of coherence as an internally-generated standard.As one product of reading multiple texts, readers need to build an intertext model. This intertext model comprises the semantic and argumentative relationships among the documents and relevant source information (Britt, Perfetti, Sandak, & Rouet, 1999; Perfetti, Rouet, & Britt, 1999; Rouet, Britt, Mason, & Perfetti, 1996). In addition, multiple text comprehension requires the construction of an integrated mental model. The integrated mental model represents the content information from multiple texts integrated with background knowledge and can vary on a continuum from unintegrated representations for each text to a fully integrated representation of all texts. For the construction of such an integrated mental model, it is essential that readers construct a situation model for each text content, that is, a more (or less) complete mental representation of what the text is about (Kintsch, 1988). The construction of the situation model requires readers to not only use information directly provided by the texts but also to elaborate on the information from information stored in their long-term memory. The construction of situation models largely relies on passive (automatic) cognitive processes. Textual information processed at a given point during reading passively activates the memory of information provided in the same text or in a different text read earlier and background knowledge and beliefs (e.g., Albrecht & O'Brien, 1993; Beker, Jolles, Lorch, & van den Broek, 2016; Perfetti et al., 1999). To form the situation model, new textual information is integrated with the activated information from memory. The integration process is also a largely passive, text-driven process based on semantic associations between information from the text and information in memory (for an overview, see McNamara & Magliano, 2009).Current research and theories also suggest that activation and integration during situation model construction are complemented by a third passive comprehension process, which has been termed validation (O'Brien & Cook, 2015; Richter, 2015; Richter & Singer, 2017). Validation is a routine cognitive process during which readers check the consistency of new information with currently activated knowledge and beliefs and currently activated information from previously read text(s). The idea that readers routinely and involuntarily validate information is supported by a number of studies based on different experimental paradigms, such as reading and reaction time and eye-tracking studies (for an overview, see Isberner & Richter, 2014). For example, Richter, Schroeder, and Wöhrmann (2009) presented single words on a computer screen, one-by-one in rapid succession (e.g., 300 ms per word), which together formed simple statements. When enough words were presented from a sentence to evaluate the veridicality of the sentence in the experimental trials, university students were asked to judge whether the last presented word was spelled correctly by providing a binary response (i.e., yes vs. no). Hence, the task was unrelated to the content of the sentence or even to the semantics of the word that required a response. Richter et al., 2009 investigated the response times (i.e., the time needed by participants to indicate whether the word was spelled correctly) and also error rates. The sentences were varied in such a way that the sentences were either true (e.g., libraries have books) or false (e.g., computers have emotions) based on easily accessible world knowledge. The results revealed that the validity of the sentence (was it true or false based on participants world knowledge) interacted with the required response of whether the last word was spelled correctly. When the sentence was false, but the correct response was positive (i.e., the word was written correctly), participants needed more time to give their response, and they also made more errors (Richter et al., 2009). These findings suggest that readers routinely and involuntarily validate information and that inconsistent, implausible, or false information evokes a negative response tendency, that is, a tendency to give a “no” response in an unrelated task. This effect has also been found for belief-relevant information (Gilead, Sela, & Maril, 2019). Gilead and colleagues (2018) found in an experiment with university students that belief-inconsistent claims (e.g., The internet has made people more isolated/sociable) elicited the same negative response tendency that was found for false or implausible statements. In the next section, we discuss possible effects of non-strategic validation processes on the comprehension of complex and conflicting multiple texts and the role of prior beliefs in this context.
1.2. Effects of validation on multiple text comprehensionValidation can be based on all information stored in long-term memory that becomes activated during comprehension (Richter, 2015). Prior beliefs are often strong enough to be passively activated during comprehension, especially when readers are reading science-related texts on topics that are relevant for everyday decisions such as the risks and benefits of vaccinations, electromagnetic radiation of cell phones, or nutritional side-effects. In such circumstances, readers often possess prior beliefs that are closer to one argumentative position in the science-related controversy, and these beliefs are as quickly used to evaluate argumentative claims as the information is comprehended (Maier et al., 2018; Voss, Fincher-Kiefer, Wiley, & Silfies, 1993; Wyer & Radvansky, 1999). For example, Voss et al. (1993) presented a combination of a claim (e.g., abortion should be illegal) and a reason (e.g., terminating a pregnancy is murder) to undergraduates. Claims were always presented first and reasons were either strong or weak and supporting or opposing. Participants’ task was to judge whether the reason was supporting or opposing the presented claim. An important finding in this study was that participants were faster in responding to belief-consistent reasons, suggesting that a claim activates prior beliefs quickly during reading even when it was not required by the actual task.The Two-Step Model of Validation (Richter & Maier, 2017) uses the concept of validation to explain how and why prior beliefs affect the comprehension of belief-relevant multiple texts. According to this model, readers by default often rely solely on the first of two validation steps, which is a routine non-strategic validation during comprehension (Step 1). In Step 1, readers' prior beliefs serve as an epistemic gatekeeper. This mechanism leads to an immediate disruption of comprehension when belief-inconsistent information is encountered because readers validate the consistency of textual information with their prior beliefs (Maier et al., 2018; Voss et al., 1993), but the disruption is typically not followed by readers’ attempt to repair the inconsistency with strategic and resource-intensive comprehension. Consequentially, belief-inconsistent information is processed in a shallower manner than belief-consistent information. This bias in processing leads to poorer comprehension of belief-inconsistent information. In line with these assumptions, research with different groups of readers, different topics, and different comprehension tasks have repeatedly found that learning, memory, and retention of belief-relevant material is affected by prior beliefs. These studies specifically show a text-belief consistency effect in which readers demonstrate a stronger comprehension of belief-consistent texts and arguments (e.g., Abendroth & Richter, 2020a; Maier & Richter, 2013, 2014; Wiley, 2005, for a systematic overview see; Richter & Maier, 2017). For example, Wiley (2005) found a stronger situation model for belief-consistent arguments when undergraduate students read multiple arguments that were either arguing for the belief-consistent or the belief-inconsistent position in a publicly debated controversy. This effect occurred only when arguments of the same type (i.e., belief-consistent or belief-inconsistent) were presented together but not when belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent arguments were presented interleaved.The idea that beliefs serve as a type of filter to allocate cognitive resources to belief-relevant material during reading is similar to the idea of relevance (e.g., McCrudden, et al., 2011) or perspective effects (e.g., Anderson & Pichert, 1978). Research on these topics has repeatedly found that information perceived as relevant for a given perspective or reading goal receives more attention during reading and is better remembered after reading (e.g., Anmarkrud, McCrudden, Bråten, & Strømsø, 2013; Kaakinen & Hyönä, 2011). A similar effect might occur based on prior beliefs, that is, prior beliefs serve as standards of relevance affecting immediate and delayed processing as well as memory and comprehension of belief-relevant material. However, in contrast to relevance instructions as externally-provided cues, the influence of prior beliefs on processing and comprehension might be beyond readers’ strategic control.The comprehension of conflicting multiple texts requires that readers combine information from all texts into a complete picture of the issue to achieve a comprehensive understanding. Hence, this requirement should also include comprehending and understanding belief-inconsistent arguments and texts. The Two-Step Model of Validation proposes that readers will be successful in comprehending belief-inconsistent texts only when they engage in a second, optional validation step that includes strategic, resource-intensive, and goal-dependent elaboration of new information (Step 2). Processes involved in the strategic elaboration of information require a greater amount of cognitive resources, prior knowledge, and metacognitive knowledge to shield against belief effects. Moreover, such strategic validation processes should be especially beneficial when reading belief-inconsistent information because this type of information receives less cognitive processing by default. In support of this assumption, eye-tracking data (Maier et al., 2018) indicates that strategic processing and comprehension are linked. In detail, university undergraduates comprehended belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent multiple texts equally well when they performed more look-backs to earlier parts of the texts as strategic processing indicators. Time-pressure, low working memory capacity, low prior knowledge, or unawareness of belief effects make it unlikely that readers are able to successfully comprehend belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent multiple texts (Richter & Maier, 2017). Prior knowledge, for example, is one important pre-requisite for elaborative processing in the framework of the Two-Step Model of Validation. In contrast to prior beliefs, prior knowledge can be used to resolve inconsistencies between multiple texts and to successfully comprehend belief-inconsistent information. In line with this assumption, Wiley (2005) found that prior knowledge can shield against the text-belief consistency effect. In this study, undergraduates with low domain knowledge on a given topic (e.g., political science graduate students reading about a legal topic) were influenced by their beliefs in terms of a text-belief consistency effect in argument recall, whereas students with high domain knowledge (e.g., law students reading legal texts) showed no effect of prior beliefs on recall.
1.3. Interventions to foster multiple text comprehensionMultiple text comprehension is a challenging task for most readers because they usually experience difficulties in integrating information across texts (Bråten, Braasch, & Salmerón, in press; Richter & Maier, 2017; Stadtler, Bromme, & Rouet, 2018). Research has investigated several types of interventions that aim at increasing readers' comprehension of conflicting multiple texts (for overviews, see Barzilai, Zohar, & Mo-Hagani, 2018; Wiley, Jaeger, & Griffin, 2018). In research on multiple texts for which readers hold beliefs, such interventions have focused on specific reading goals (e.g., Bohn-Gettler & McCrudden, 2018; Maier & Richter, 2016), the order in which texts were presented (Abendroth & Richter, 2020a; Maier & Richter, 2013; Wiley, 2005), or on metacognitive strategies (Maier & Richter, 2014). For example, Bohn-Gettler and McCrudden (2018) provided undergraduates with the instruction to either focus on pro or contra arguments of a dual-position text. This task-relevance instruction influenced memory such that participants recalled task-relevant information better, and this relevance effect in the comprehension outcome was independent of participants' beliefs. In contrast, strategic processing of the texts was influenced by participants' beliefs independent of the task instruction. In detail, participants used confirmation strategies when reading belief-consistent text and disconfirmation strategies when reading belief-inconsistent text. These results suggest that relevance task instructions are able to alter memory for belief-relevant information, but not the way in which readers process belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent information. In the context of the MD-TRACE model, such externally provided specific reading goals or task instructions influence particular reading situations because they affect the task model and the particular circumstances. Metacognitive strategy trainings, however, focus on readers' internal resources, targeting readers’ knowledge and self-regulation of cognitions (Flavell, 1976). It includes knowledge of the cognitive processes that underlie mental activities such as thinking and comprehension and strategies of self-regulation and self-monitoring to control the direction, intensity and persistence of these cognitive processes.In general, comprehending and integrating information from multiple texts necessitates the coordination of multiple processes, which is likely to be affected by metacognitive processes. In the context of belief-relevant multiple texts, enhancing readers' knowledge on how they comprehend the different texts with conflicting information and on what processes are involved during comprehension might increase their ability to monitor and regulate relevant cognitive processes in a functional way. This approach could foster readers’ critical thinking about conflicting multiple texts (Ku & Ho, 2010; Maier & Richter, 2014). The importance of metacognitive knowledge for belief-relevant multiple-text comprehension is supported by McCrudden and Barnes (2016) who investigated the myside bias in evaluation of belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent arguments. In their study, secondary students differed in the strength of the myside bias, some showing more objectivity than others. Using qualitative data from interviews, the authors investigated the strategic processing of more-objective and less-objective participants. They found that more-objective participants used normative criteria for an in-depth scrutiny of belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent arguments, whereas less-objective participants scrutinized only belief-inconsistent arguments by using normative criteria but also irrelevant validation criteria. The authors concluded that less-objective and more-objective participants differ in their individual conceptual and procedural metacognition, which causes the myside bias. A similar effect occurred in the processing data from Bohn-Gettler and McCrudden (2018), showing a disadvantage in the strategic processing of belief-inconsistent text material for undergraduates. It is important to note that these studies only investigated belief effects during strategic processing. However, as noted earlier, beliefs also affect comprehension of belief-relevant multiple texts during passive and non-strategic processing stages (Maier et al., 2018). Metacognitive knowledge about such non-strategic belief effects on comprehension might therefore also be important.To the best of our knowledge, only one study to date has investigated the effectiveness of a metacognitive strategy training on the comprehension of belief relevant multiple texts (Maier & Richter, 2014). In this study, undergraduate university students in the training condition received knowledge about three metacognitive strategies: (1) becoming aware of the influence of prior beliefs, (2) monitoring for intertextual inconsistencies, and (3) using prior knowledge for argument evaluation. The first strategy was especially meant to enhance readers' awareness of belief effects during non-strategic processing, that is, awareness of how readers tend to favor belief-consistent information in text comprehension (Step 1 of the Two-Step Model of Validation, Richter & Maier, 2017). This strategy of the metacognitive training was expected to lead to an initiation of more strategic validation processes for belief-inconsistent texts and additionally should increase the persistence to continue this effortful processing until a good comprehension for belief-inconsistent information is reached. As such, becoming aware of the influence of prior beliefs on processing might lead to an adaption of the standard of coherence which readers might set differently for belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent texts. The additionally provided metacognitive strategies in the study from Maier and Richter (2014) were expected to assist readers to successfully and strategically process belief-relevant material. As such, they focused on relevant activities and monitoring processes (i.e., ongoing control of task-processing regarding one's cognitive goal) that readers should engage in during Step 2 of the Two-Step Model of Validation.In addition to varying whether participants received the metacognitive training or no training, Maier and Richter (2014) also varied the motivational circumstances for two of three training conditions by providing external feedback in a prior task that was either positive or negative. One additional training group received no feedback. The results revealed a text-belief consistency effect for participants who had received no training, showing greater comprehension of a belief-consistent compared to a belief-inconsistent text. These participants spent equal amount of time reading the two text types. Participants in the training conditions, however, spent more time reading the belief-inconsistent text, but their comprehension outcome still differed depending on their motivation. A text-belief consistency effect was found for participants in the training groups that received either none or negative external feedback. Participants in the training group with positive feedback (i.e., beneficial motivational circumstances), however, comprehended the belief-inconsistent text to a similar extent as the belief-consistent text. This result suggests that more time devoted to reading belief-inconsistent material is not sufficient to successfully understand such text types. More crucial is how belief-inconsistent material is processed (see also McCrudden & Barnes, 2016).
1.4. Rationale and overviewPrevious research indicates that readers often have a one-sided mental representation of multiple texts in which belief-consistent information is represented to a greater extent (text-belief consistency effect, for an overview see Richter & Maier, 2017). Such a bias reduces readers' ability to fully understand controversially debated scientific issues, to critically weigh the evidence and to make informed judgements about the issue. Accordingly, assisting readers in the comprehension of multiple belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent texts is an important step in counteracting this bias. There is evidence that knowledge about metacognitive strategies on non-strategic and strategic processes involved in multiple text comprehension can reduce the text-belief consistency effect by increasing participants’ comprehension of belief-inconsistent information (Maier & Richter, 2014). However, this effect only occurred when information about the metacognitive strategies was combined with beneficial motivational circumstances. Given that learning with multiple texts often involves self-regulated learning, constructing beneficial motivational circumstances externally is likely to be unreliable. Instead, a metacognitive training should be effective on its own. In two experiments we investigated whether training readers how to use metacognitive strategies focusing on belief-biasing validation processes during multiple text comprehension can reduce the text-belief consistency effect independently of motivational circumstances.In the Maier and Richter study, the effectiveness of the metacognitive strategy knowledge intervention was not compared with the effectiveness of an alternative intervention. To address this research gap, we compared the effectiveness of a metacognitive strategy training for multiple text comprehension to the effectiveness of the PQ4R training (Thomas & Robinson, 1972) in the present studies. The PQ4R training is a well-situated and effective reading skill training that has been shown to increase elaborative processing (Thomas & Robinson, 1972) and has a long history of use (for an overview, see Slavin, 2014).One explanation for the relevance of beneficial motivational circumstances in the study from Maier and Richter (2014) is that mere declarative prescriptions of metacognitive knowledge were used (e.g., the biasing influence of prior beliefs). In this respect, metacognitive knowledge comprises person-related knowledge (i.e., perceiving oneself as a thinker), task-related knowledge (i.e., recognizing the tasks’ characteristics and demands), and knowledge about strategies and their effectiveness in coping with a particular task. Maier and Richter provided such information to undergraduate university students. In detail, knowledge about the person (e.g., the influence of validation and prior beliefs), about the task (e.g., information on the challenges readers encounter during the comprehension of belief-relevant multiple texts such as relating information across texts) and about activities of self-regulation and self-monitoring were provided. Metacognition, however, also includes regulation of cognitions (Flavell, 1976), which was not taught or practiced in the study from Maier and Richter. In the present experiments, we combined metacognitive knowledge with two elements that were viewed as relevant for the regulation of cognition during the comprehension of belief-relevant multiple text: observational learning and individual practice. In detail, the metacognitive training in our experiments provided participants with information on how to regulate their cognitions during the comprehension of belief-relevant multiple texts, that is, by allowing insight into self-regulation and self-monitoring of the cognitive processes in focus of the trainings. For this aim, learning from modeling examples (van Gog & Rummel, 2010) was integrated by watching role models who successfully or unsuccessfully applied the metacognitive strategies (or PQ4R steps in the control condition). This component of the training was further supported by either (a) practicing the use of the strategies/steps without external control or feedback (Experiment 1) and (b) noticing and explaining when someone uses the strategies/steps with elaborative feedback on the answers as well as testing factual knowledge about the strategies/steps (Experiment 2).In both experiments, we expected the metacognitive strategy training to reduce the text-belief consistency effect compared to the PQ4R training. As such, the goal of the training was not to foster comprehension overall, but to reduce the gap between the comprehension of belief-consistent and belief-inconsistent texts by increasing the understanding for belief-inconsistent information. This is crucial because it should enable students to also understand valuable and reasonable counterarguments and to construct a comprehensive understanding of scientific issues.
