In the current market scenario, the online market has emerged as one of the most expedient markets. It removes the physical barriers, reduces the cost of infrastructure, and provides resources at one-click. When many companies become a part of the online market, feedback and price play an important role in their sustainability. Providers and customers have a different mindset while participating in the online market. The provider wants to earn more profit and wants to compete in the market for a long time, however a customer prefers economical rates with satisfactory services for the required resources.
Cloud computing is different from legacy market set-up, as virtual resources are provided on rent as per the duration asked from the customers. Cloud computing provides the infrastructure in the form of virtual machines with different configurations based on CPU, memory, storage, and bandwidth on pay per usage model [1]. The customer requires dummy terminals to access these resources, without the need for specialized infrastructure, maintenance, and technical knowledge. There are popular pricing schemes namely fixed pricing scheme, dynamic pricing scheme, and auction pricing scheme. In the competitive market, the fixed price model is not successful as there are ups and downs in the market. In the dynamic model, the pricing scheme is used according to demand and supply flow, as seen in air reservation, booking of taxis, buses, railway reservations, and in online shopping. This is a one-sided business, and a customer is just a passive entity. Auction is another pricing scheme that offers a good solution over dynamic pricing as both customers and providers can participate actively. Presently, the one-sided auction pricing scheme is followed at several places, where providers auction for their resources according to resource availability and demand in the market. Cloud providers have an independent system for the allocation of resources according to their policies. Customers need to review each provider’s resources as well as pricing patterns to decide economical options according to their requirements. However, for a new customer, apple to apple comparison of different providers’ products and pricing is difficult. Customers generally choose providers they are familiar with or the one popular in the market. They might oversight the providers who are new and are providing resources at genuine prices. So, many times, both customers and providers miss a genuine deal beneficial to them. The double auction model resolves this issue and provides a common platform where customers and providers participate in the auction for the best deals, but the participants still have to struggle to calculate the price of each resource from the total budget. The combinatorial auction model resolves this issue by considering the bundle bid for the whole list of resources, instead of asking for a bid for every resource separately. In the combinatorial double auction model, both customers and providers submit their bundle bids with their resource list in the auction according to their budget and required profit margin.
In the proposed approach, a combinatorial double auction framework is considered that brings all the providers and customers under one roof and provides a platform where both can participate in the auction with their preferences. Providers and customers are required to register for a double auction framework. They need to submit their preferences that include the resources list and the bid price. A provider who is providing required resources at a very economical price may not provide the required quality of service as per the expectations of the customers. So, the customers’ feedback becomes an important criterion for the overall evaluation of the proposed system. A provider who is providing required resources on genuine rates with quality of service will be given the preference.
An important trait in the online market is malicious providers. They are the market spoilers who want to outperform their peers in any situation, making everyone else lose a chance to sustain in the market. They can give the lowest rate, even lower than the actual cost of the product, to attract more customers. Market spoilers are ready to book losses in the beginning to make their identity. It demotivates the middle-level providers to participate in an auction, leads to reduced availability of providers. The proposed approach not only takes care of the genuineness of a provider and penalizing market spoilers but also gives priority to those who have good feedback to enhance customer trust levels in the system.
The remainder of the paper is organized into the sections as follows: Section 2 presents related work on cloud computing and resource provisioning in the auction market. Section 3 describes the proposed approach for the auction market in cloud computing. Section 4 describes the evaluation criteria. Section 5 presents experimental studies and performance evaluations. Section 6 presents two scenarios of Case 2 and Case 3. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper and future directions.
