Not so long ago, the electricity flowed in only one direction and it was exclusively produced by large power plants, transmitted and distributed to the final consumers who had analogue meters read once a month. At the time, the electricity suppliers and distribution system operators knew very little about the consumers’ daily consumption. The emerging distributed generation, especially the PhotoVoltaic (PV) panels installed on the roofs and facades of buildings, has changed the usual electricity patterns; nowadays, it flows in both directions and is recorded hourly or even at shorter intervals. Hence, the role of consumers has changed significantly. They have become active players that can generate electricity, program flexible appliances, control the consumption via smart plugs (IoT) [1] and make good use of the storage potential of batteries that come along with modern appliances, such as: vacuum cleaner, electric chain-saw, drill, mower, etc. Also, based on thorough research, the progress of smart metering implementation and price-based demand response strategies, such as advanced Time-of-Use (ToU) tariffs is more effective in motivating consumers to consume at low tariff rates. However, the decision to implement smart metering on a large scale usually requires trial periods that are simply aimed at identifying the opportunity to install the measuring devices [2]. During such trials, the large volume of data collected from pre- and post-trial questionnaires and smart meters requires big data analytical methods able to extract valuable information and knowledge for decision makers.
In this paper, we propose a methodology for analysing the large volume of data collected from both smart meters and complex pre- and post-trial questionnaires aiming to identify the electricity consumers’ behaviour and their potential to schedule the appliances, based on certain incentives. With this objective in mind, we structured the paper in 7 sections setting clear goals for each section. The first section analyses the intricacies of dealing with a large volume electricity consumption and questionnaire data. The second section presents the state-of-the-art scientific research that addresses similar concerns. The processing section of the input data deals with the origin, structure, formats and particularities of the respective data: the tariff and electricity consumption data, as well as the data collected from questionnaires. Moreover, it includes metering and questionnaire data processing, outlining the various tools and techniques we used to prepare and analyse the data. The fourth section, Methodology, describes the scientific methodology for the later stages of the questionnaire data processing. The fifth section, Results, includes the findings, grouped by the origin of data from which we drew conclusions. Finally, the last two sections comprise the discussion and conclusions for the entire paper.
