Emotions play an important role in daily life and influence the perception of the surroundings. Recently, many human–computer interaction systems are established by lots of research communities in domestic and abroad, so the automatic classification of emotional states becomes indispensable. This can be achieved with a variety of methods, such as subjective self-reporting, neurophysiological measurements and so on. In recent years, electroencephalography (EEG) based emotion recognition has received widespread attention because it is a simple, cheap, portable, and easy-to-use emotion classification method [1]. EEG signals record the relationship between emotional state and brain activity and reflect very subtle emotional changes with high time resolution [2]. However, EEG signals have the shortcomings [3] as time asymmetry and instability, low signal-to-noise ratio, and uncertain brain areas of specific reactions. Therefore, EEG-based emotion recognition is still a challenging task.
Many researchers have proposed their methods for emotion recognition using EEG, such as emotion recognition methods based on convolutional neural networks(CNN) [4], [5], [6], deep belief networks [7], graph convolutional neural network [3], [8] and so on. Recently, graph convolutional neural networks (GCNN) and long-short term memory neural networks (LSTM) have been gradually adopted in this fields. But We are facing problems that how to fuse GCNN with LSTM and apply it to EEG-based emotion recognition.
To address the above issues, we propose a novel emotion recognition method based on the deep learning model. Firstly, EEG data is calibrated by 3s baseline data and divided into segments with 6s time window, and then differential entropy (DE) is extracted from each segment to construct feature cube. Secondly, the feature cube of each segment serves as the input of deep learning model which fuses graph convolutional neural network and long-short term memories neural networks. In the fusion model, multiple GCNNs are applied to extract graph domain features, LSTM cells are used to memorize the change of the relationship between two EEG channels within a specific time and extract temporal features, and Dense layer is used to attain the emotion classification result. At last, we conducted extensive experiments on DEAP dataset and experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method has better classification performance than the state-of-the-art methods. We attained the average classification accuracy of 90.45% and 90.60% on the DEAP dataset for valence and arousal in subject-dependent experiments while 84.81% and 85.27% in subject-independent experiments.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:

•We propose a new emotion recognition method using deep learning model based on EEG’s differential entropy. In contrast to the traditional emotion recognition method, DE is extracted from each divided segment to generate feature cube, multiple GCNNs are applied to extract graph domain features from each feature cube, and LSTM cells are applied to memorize the change of the relationship between two EEG channels within a specific time and extract temporal features.•We propose a fusion model of LSTM and GCNN for emotion classification (named ECLGCNN). In the fusion model, each EEG channel corresponds to a vertex node, and the functional relationship between two channels corresponds to edge of the graph where the greater value of the edge is, the closer the functional relationship between two channels is; LSTM cells’ gates are used to extract effective information from input (the output of GCNNs) for emotion classification. The fusion of GCNN and LSTM improves effectiveness of emotion recognition.•We conduct extensive experiments on DEAP dataset to verify ECLGCNN model. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method has better emotion classification performance than the state-of-the-art methods. The average accuracy of 90.45% and 90.60% for valence and arousal in subject-dependent experiments are achieved while 84.81% and 85.27% in subject-independent experiments.
The remainder of this paper is as follow. We briefly review EEG features, GCNN, LSTM and emotion recognition methods on DEAP dataset in Section 2. In Section 3, we present the proposed emotional recognition method and its key components, including DE, fusion model of GCNN and LSTM and its architecture. In Section 4, we introduce the DEAP data-set adopted in the experiments and the evaluation indicators and analyze the experimental results of ECLGCNN on DEAP in detail. We conclude the paper and discuss the future work in Section 5.
