With the expansion of tourism websites and social networks, a huge amount of data and comments are produced and posted regularly (Ghane'i-Ostad, Vahdat-Nejad, & Abdolrazzagh-Nezhad, 2018; Neidhardt, Rümmele, & Werthner, 2017). People who are planning for a trip use this data as well as reviews of other tourists as rich sources of information to select their appropriate destinations and points of interest (Hayashi & Yoshida, 2018; Renjith, Sreekumar, & Jathavedan, 2020). However, it is a major challenge for tourists to manually process large volumes of data (Borràs, Moreno, & Valls, 2014). In this regard, various tourism recommendation systems have been proposed that try to provide personalized suggestions to users. They aim to extract user preferences and present recommendations that are more in line with their preferences (Abel, Herder, Houben, Henze, & Krause, 2013). Some recommendation systems cluster users based on similarity in previously visited places and provide the same recommendations to users of each cluster (Esmaeili, Mardani, Golpayegani, & Madar, 2020; Wan, Hong, Huang, Peng, & Li, 2018). For example, in a recommendation system, the same paths are suggested to the users with similar profiles (Alrasheed, Alzeer, Alhowimel, & Althyabi, 2020).
It is noteworthy that the users' visit to a tourist attraction by itself does not provide enough information and their reviews regarding these places are also important. As a result, another set of recommendation systems leverage an analysis of comments to extract user preferences (Xiang, Du, Ma, & Fan, 2017). In this regard, user reviews are analyzed and compared with attractions' metadata, and places with the highest matching are suggested (Leal, González-Vélez, Malheiro, & Burguillo, 2017). In this type of tourism recommendation systems, the frequent keywords used in the comments are exploited, regardless of the sentiments of users. As a result, the negative words that are stressed in user's text might be mistakenly returned as their preferences. While sentiment analysis is important in the tourism domain, it has been overlooked in most cases (Alaei, Becken, & Stantic, 2019). In fact, a comprehensive recommendation system in the context of tourism should include the following features:
•It should identify preferences by looking for concepts instead of being limited to specific keywords.•It should leverage sentiment analysis on user comments to identify their positive versus negative preferences.•It should provide context-aware recommendations (Vahdat-Nejad, 2014), which are adapted to user's current situation.
To the best of the authors' knowledge, none of the available tourism recommendation systems meets all of the above features. Hence, this paper proposes a context-aware tourism recommendation system by sentiment analysis. In this system, text processing and sentiment analysis are leveraged to extract users' preferences, precisely. The preference extraction part is an extension to the initial paper (Abbasi-Moud, Vahdat-Nejad, & Mansoor, 2019) in which user reviews about various attractions are extracted and preprocessed. Then the preferences are extracted through semantic clustering and sentiment analysis. This research extends the initial idea by extracting features of attractions from aggregated users' reviews and proposing a personalized recommendation system. The system additionally utilizes user contextual information including location (in order to identify the attractions around him/her), time (to check when the attractions could be visited), and weather (to provide recommendations that are appropriate to the current weather situation). The proposed system is developed by Python. Therefore, an experiment is conducted on TripAdvisor,1 as a well-known travel platform, to evaluate the proposed system. In this regard, a dataset including 100 users' comments and visits in 2018 has been gathered. The evaluation results reveal high efficiency of the proposed recommendation system in terms of precision, recall, and f-measure.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In the next section, a review of the related literature is provided. Section 2 introduces the proposed recommendation system. In the Section 4, details of the implementation and evaluation, and in the final section, the conclusion remarks are presented.
