The incidence of kidney tumors is increasing, especially for small, localized tumors that are often discovered incidentally (Hollingsworth et al., 2006). It is often difficult to radiographically differentiate between benign kidney tumors (e.g., angiomyolipoma and oncocytoma) and malignant Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) (Millet et al., 2011), but most kidney tumors are eventually found to be malignant (Chawla et al., 2006). Surgical removal of localized RCC is regarded as curative (Capitanio and Montorsi, 2016), so most localized kidney tumors are removed despite the sizable minority that are postoperatively found to be benign (Kim et al., 2019).
Traditionally, kidney tumors were removed through radical nephrectomy in which the entire kidney along with the tumor are excised (Robson, 1963). However, in order to preserve renal function (Scosyrev et al., 2014), partial nephrectomy, where only the tumor is removed, has recently become the standard of care in an increasing share of tumors with lower surgical complexity (Campbell et al., 2017). Further, a growing body of literature suggests that a large proportion of renal tumors are indolent (Richard, Jewett, Bhatt, Evans, Timilsina, Finelli, 2016, Uzosike, Patel, Alam, Schwen, Gupta, Gorin, Johnson, Gausepohl, Riffon, Trock, et al., 2018, McIntosh, Ristau, Ruth, Jennings, Ross, Smaldone, Chen, Viterbo, Greenberg, Kutikov, et al., 2018, Patel, Riffon, Joice, Johnson, Chang, Wagner, McKiernan, Trock, Allaf, Pierorazio, 2016), meaning they will never become a danger to the patient, and thus active surveillance has emerged as an increasingly popular treatment strategy for tumors exhibiting less aggressive characteristics in imaging.
With these developments, there is an exciting opportunity to reduce overtreatment of renal tumors without compromising oncologic outcomes (Mir et al., 2017), but there is a need for methods to objectively quantify the complexity and aggression of kidney tumors in order to better inform treatment decisions like radical nephrectomy vs. partial nephrectomy vs. active surveillance. Clinicians predominantly rely on imaging, primarily CT, to assess the complexity and aggression of renal masses. A number of manual scoring systems, termed nephrometry scores, have been proposed for this purpose (Kutikov, Uzzo, 2009, Ficarra, Novara, Secco, Macchi, Porzionato, De Caro, Artibani, 2009, Simmons, Ching, Samplaski, Park, Gill, 2010), but they have seen limited adoption due to the significant manual effort they require (Simmons et al., 2012), the interobserver variability between expert raters (Spaliviero et al., 2015), and their limited predictive power (Kutikov, Smaldone, Egleston, Manley, Canter, Simhan, Boorjian, Viterbo, Chen, Greenberg, et al., 2011, Hayn, Schwaab, Underwood, Kim, 2011, Okhunov, Rais-Bahrami, George, Waingankar, Duty, Montag, Rosen, Sunday, Vira, Kavoussi, 2011).
Semantic segmentation of kidneys and kidney tumors offers an expressive characterization of the lesion, but it imposes an even larger burden of manual effort than most nephrometry scores. Reliable automatic semantic segmentation of kidneys and kidney tumors would enable full automation of several nephrometry scores as well as studies of kidney tumor morphology on unprecedented scales.
The 2019 Kidney and Kidney Tumor Segmentation Challenge (KiTS19) aimed to accelerate progress on this automatic segmentation problem by releasing a dataset of 210 CT images with associated high-quality kidney and kidney tumor segmentations that could be used for training learned models. It also aimed to objectively assess the state of the art by holding a collection of 90 segmentation masks private for participants to predict given associated imaging. Participating teams were ranked based on their average Sørensen-Dice coefficient between the kidneys and tumors across these 90 test cases.
This challenge was hosted on grand-challenge.org1 where it accrued 826 registrations prior to the deadline. 106 unique teams submitted valid predictions to the challenge, and the official leaderboard2 reflects submissions from 100 unique teams who met all criteria for a complete submission, including a detailed manuscript describing their method. This challenge was accepted to be held in conjunction with the 2019 International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) in Shenzhen, China, and it has now entered an indefinite “open leaderboard” phase in which any grand-challenge.org user may submit their predictions on the 90 test cases and have them scored and added to the leaderboard without delay.
The remainder of this manuscript is structured as follows: In Section 2 we give a brief description of prior work in 3D segmentation as well as existing public datasets and prior challenges. In Section 3 we describe the design of the challenge, including the dataset, rules, timeline, and evaluation metric. In Section 4 we provide an in-depth description of the methods of the top five placing teams, and discuss the implications of these high-performing methods in the context of 3D segmentation research. In Section 7 we discuss the limitations of this challenge, including issues with the dataset, challenge design, and what could be done to address these in future iterations. Finally we give concluding remarks in Section 8.
