Organophosphorus pesticides (OPs) have been widely used in agriculture for controlling and eliminating of pests, including vectors of human or animal disease [1,2]. However, excessive use caused bioaccumulation in the environment, resulting in increased potential toxicity of pesticide residues to human body [3,4]. Consequently, advanced OPs detection technologies are in urgent demand for rapid determination and reliable quantification of pesticide residues. Although laboratory-based instrumental analytical methods, such as gas chromatography, high-performance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, endowed powerful trace analysis capabilities [[5], [6], [7]], the requirement of cost-prohibitive, time-consuming process and the lack of pocket-size device severely limited their on-site analysis. Thus, developing new measures for detecting pesticide residues in a speedy, portable and cost-efficient manner [8,9] are crucial.
Owing to the low price, convenient operation and excellent portability, point-of-care testing (POCT) has become a new research hotspot attention and achieved rapid development [4,[10], [11], [12]]. For instance, solid-phase carrier test strips have been employed in visible colorimetric strategy for the detection of OPs, which only provided the qualitative/semi-quantitative screening [13,14]. In addition, the practical applications of the paper-based strips had to be compromised in real samples due to the poor stability and insufficient sensitivity [15]. In order to achieve accurate and stable quantitative monitoring of OPs, other solid-phase carrier-based sensors with simple and effective identification were urgently required. Taking advantages of better mechanical stability, excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability, sodium alginate (SA) hydrogels have attracted increasing attention in the area of immobilization and encapsulation [[16], [17], [18]]. As a barrier to the external environment, hydrogel could provide a relatively inert environment in the gel matrix and allow molecules to diffuse through the porous structure, which improved the stability and functionalization of the materials [19]. Therefore, hydrogel was considered to be a promising carrier for pesticides detection [9,20].
Furthermore, for portable detection in the field of accurate tracing pesticide, smartphone-based sensor displayed tremendous potentiality in on-site applications due to extensive global coverage of smartphone [21,22]. For example, lateral flow aptamer assay integrated smartphone-based portable device with additional image processing software was constructed for pesticide detection [23]. The smartphone-based sensing platform for semiquantitative detection of imidacloprid pesticides was proposed [24]. Our group developed a silicon dots-embedded hydrogel platform for monitoring pesticides by analyzing the changes of RGB intensity in the photos taken by a smartphone [9]. In spite of all the substantial progress obtained with these emerging approaches, smartphone might not allow for the on-site quantitative measurement of OPs, due to the burden of leveraging additional color picker software. In general, the ideal smartphone-based platform should benefit from the integration of additional functions, such as on-site image data processing, wireless connectivity, and a concise interface for the presentation of results instantly [25]. Most recently, some custom-designed applications (apps) were pre-loaded in a smartphone, which could be applied for on-site data processing [26,27]. In order to achieve widespread adoption of this smartphone-sensor for profiling pesticides in POCT, three existing limitations must be addressed: (i) poor stability (ii) data unreliability (iii) complex data processing platform.
Inspired by the aforementioned development, we proposed the concept of target-responsive hydrogel (TRhg) integrated with a smartphone for the accurate on-site monitoring of OPs. As illustrated in Scheme 1, the intrinsic oxidase-like activity of MnO2 nanoflakes (NFs) could catalytically oxidize 3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) into blue product (oxTMB) [28]. The composition of TMB-MnO2 NFs system and SA hydrogel were integrated into a commercial 96-well microplate to manufacture the portable kit. MnO2 NFs would decompose to form Mn2+ with the presence of H2O2 [29] and further suppressed color reaction. The concentration of H2O2 was controlled by acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and choline oxidase (ChO)-catalyzed hydrolysis reaction of acetylcholine (ACh) [30]. That is, the proposed H2O2-controlled TRhg platform could be employed to monitor the inhibitor of AChE. In this proposed kit, target analyte paraoxon could inhibit the activity of AChE, and further suppress the generation of H2O2, so that less MnO2 was decomposed accompanying by the color change of TRhg kit. For accurate quantitative analysis, the color variations were recorded by a smartphone with a self-made app which had an in-built image-processing program to translate corresponding image information into gray value that displaying a linear relationship with the concentration of paraoxon. More importantly, the test results obtained by our smartphone reader were comparable with that of traditional laboratory microplate reader. This smartphone-based analysis app on-site platform might provide a novel way for environmental assessments and disease prevention because of its high credibility, facile usage and high stability.Download : Download high-res image (677KB)Download : Download full-size imageScheme 1. Schematic illustration of the target-responsive hydrogel (TRhg) smartphone sensor for the accurate on-site monitoring of OPs.
