Vibrational spectroscopy is a general technique dealing with the vibrational energy of molecules. This energy is considerably related to chemical bonds of molecules. Michelson interferometer and the Fourier algorithms played an essential role in the development of vibrational spectroscopy [1]. Three types of vibrational spectroscopy techniques are infrared (IR), Raman, and Terahertz spectroscopy. This spectroscopic technique is usually used in the broad spectrum, for instance, cosmetics, the pharmaceutical industry, food industry, biological, microbiology, and chemistry [[2], [3], [4]]. Infrared spectroscopy is based on infrared radiation interaction with a sample, leading to some bond vibrations, stretching, bending, rocking, scissoring, and twisting [5,6]. IR and Raman spectroscopy can be obtained by experimental methods as well as by computational chemistry methods.
In quantum chemical calculations, density functional theory (DFT) and ab-initio are the most used two methods. Both methods have advantages and disadvantages compared to each other. DFT methods have the ability about the more accurate calculations in the observable structural and electronic properties at the ground state when compared to ab-inito methods. In this stage, the main problems are the description of electron correlation, anharmonicity, and the solvation of the Schrödinger equation. To correct this error and obtain more accurate results, the calculation, tabulation, and use of the multiplicative linear scaling factors proposed by Pople et al. have been popular in both literature and practice. Many published vibrational scale factors belong to the related calculation level in literature and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) computational chemistry comparison and benchmark database (CCCBDB) [7]. The M06-2X has been popular recently, but there is a little vibrational frequency scale factor that belongs to M06-2× (Table 1).Table 1. Scale for values of the concordance correlation coefficient.Value of ρcStrength of agreement> 0.99Almost perfect0.95 – 0.98Substantial0.90 – 0.94Moderate< 0.89Poor
In this paper, 191 molecules in which their formula, name, and point group are given in Supp. Table S1 in Supplementary Information is taken into account. These molecules are separated into two groups, which are labeled as analysis molecules and test molecules. The analysis group contains 157 molecules, while test one contains 34 molecules. Mentioned molecules are optimized at M06-2X method with twenty five basis sets which are STO-3 G, 3-21 G, 3-21G*, 3-21+G, 3-21+G*, 6-31 G, 6-31 G(d), 6-31 G(d,p), 6-31+G, 6-31+G(d), 6-31+G(d,p), 6-31++G, 6-31++G(d), 6-31++G(d,p), 6-311 G, 6-311 G(d), 6-311 G(d,p), 6-311+G, 6-311+G(d), 6-311+G(d,p), 6-311++G, 6-311++G(d), 6-311++G(d,p), cc-pVDZ and aug-cc-pVDZ. The vibrational frequency corresponding to the symmetry type was recorded for each molecule in the analysis group and compared with the experimental ones. The vibrational scale factor belongs to each calculation level was derived. Then, the vibrational frequency corresponding to the symmetry type was recorded for each molecule in the test group. These frequencies are multiplied with derived scale factor. Corrected vibrational frequencies are compared with experimental results. In this study, descriptive statistics (mean, min, max. Std. Dev.) of corrected frequencies are presented in Table 4.
Since the sample size is quite large, independent sample t-test was used to determine differences means of corrected and experimental variables. These tests were tested by taking = 0.05 or = 0.01 (margin of error), and the test results are given in Table 4. Correlation means the relationship between variables. In statistics, the coefficient showing the degree and direction of the relationship between variables is called the correlation coefficient, and the equation that determines the functional form of the relationship between variables is called the regression equation [8]. The correlation coefficient is denoted by the letter "r". If one of the variables increases, the other increases or one decreases while the other decreases, there is a positive (same direction) relationship. If one of the variables increases or decreases while the other changes in the other direction, there is a negative relation. It shows a strong correlation between variables when the coefficient r is close to 1 or -1; being close to 0 indicates no relationship. It is expected to have a high and positive relationship between experimental and corrected frequencies. The correlation coefficient r for two variables of unit n, such as X and Y, is calculated by the following formula.(1)r=∑i=1n(xi−x¯)(yi−y¯)∑i=1n(xi−x¯)2∑i=1nyi−y¯2By considering corrected frequencies as a function of experimental frequencies, the relationship between them is formed by a simple linear regression method. As a dependent variable, Y shows experimental frequencies, independent variable X shows adjusted frequencies. The simple linear equation is expressed as follows;(2)Y=β0+β1XHere β0 is the ordinate of the point at which the regression line intersects the Y-axis. B is the slope of the regression line or the effect of 1-unit change in the independent variable on the dependent variable. The rate of explanation of the dependent variable of the independent variable, i.e., the percentage of change in the dependent variable, is calculated by the coefficient of certainty. In the simple linear regression equation, the ratio of certainty is the square of the correlation coefficient and is denoted by R2. This value is between 0 and 1. The regression equation will be obtained by standardizing the experimental and correctable frequencies. In the model obtained, the coefficient β0 will be 0 or very close to 0. Therefore, we can express the model. The coefficient of determination is expected to be very close to 1 [9].
While the experimental and corrected frequencies need to be in a high relationship, it is insufficient to say the correctness factor. They must also be highly compatible. The consistency between the two variables is determined by the Lin’s Concordance Correlation Coefficient (CCC). CCC evaluates the linear relationship between X and Y variables measured under constraints where the cut-off point is zero and the slope is 1; that is, it evaluates the distance of each pair of measurements to the line drawn at an angle of 45°. Accordingly, CCC (ρC) is formulated as(3)ρC=2σXYσX2+σY2+(μX−μY)2Here, σXY denotes the covariance between the variables, denotes the mean of variables, and denotes the variance of variables [10].
The correlation coefficient and CCC together with Cb coefficient is a measure showing the relationship between variables. It is called the "bias correction factor" and is defined as the distance between the equality line and the line obtained from the regression equation. Cb can also be called a measure of accuracy and takes a value between 0 and 1 (0 < Cb <1). Cb = 1 means that there is no separation from equality. The Cb side correction factor for the two variables is calculated as follows [11].(4)Cb=(υ+1/υ+u2)/2−1υ=σ1σ2u=(μ1−μ2)/σ1σ2Here, 0<Cb≤1 is a bias correction factor that measures how far the best-fit line deviates from the 45° line (measure of accuracy). No deviation from the 45° line occurs when Cb = 1. The further Cb is from 1, the greater the deviation is from the 45° line. The Pearson correlation coefficient p measures how far each observation deviated from the best-fit line (measure of precision).
