A vortex beam with a spiral phase distribution and carrying orbital angular momentum is widely used in optical tweezing [1,2], optical communication [3], nonlinear optics [4], spatial mode multiplexing [5], precision measurement [[6], [7], [8], [9]] and other fields. Since the vortex beam has the characteristic that the distribution of optical intensity is a ring shape, the phase at the center of the optical field cannot be determined, that is, there is a phase singularity, and actually the phase singularity means the existence of the vortex. At present, many scholars have conducted more in-depth research on the phase singularity and orbital angular momentum of the vortex beam. For example, Satyajit Maji and his colleagues studied the transformation of the transverse wave Poynting vector of a fractional vortex beam and proved for the first time the control of the extrinsic orbital angular momentum. It allows better manipulation of optically captured particles and can be used in optically driven micro-machines [10]. Jonathan Pinnel and other scholars used optical mode decomposition to quantitatively measure the OAM content of Perfect optical vortices, further enhancing the application of vortex optical in optical trapping and tweezing, and optical communications [11]. Donghui Shen analyzed the propagation characteristics of the intensity of a vortex beam after its phase is twisted, so that the control of separation speed of the vortex beam is achieved by selecting the appropriate torsion phase parameters [12]. Yf Chen studied the elliptical vortex beam with spatial damping effect from phase singularity and analyzed the influence of spatial damping on singular point distribution [13]. Kyoko Kitamura proved that the phase singularity of the optical vortex that determines the null intensity of the beam [14]. Most of these studies are directed to the study of a single optical vortex, But if a single laser that can directly generate multiple vortices with several phase singularities that is capable of controlling several individual optical traps and each trap has individually specified characteristics [15], that means when you control the number of the optical vortex or the directional movement of the optical vortex, it can not only further increase the application for vortex optical in optical tweezers, communications and other fields, even in aspects of complicated and multi-target optical manipulation and imaging [16], sub-cellular engineering, macromolecular sorting [15], there are also have value of potential applications.
At present, an optical vortex array (OVA) containing multiple vortices that has been extensively studied due to its greater flexibility and potential application prospects [16]. For example, the combination of Dammann vortex grating and meta-reflectarray [17] enables generated and detected the broadband multi-channel OVA. Since the vortex beam can be simply viewed as a linear superposition of the Laguerre-Gaussian mode [18], the OVA can also be produced by overlapping two special beams. P. Vaity et al. found that superimposing two Gaussian beams in a Mach-Zehnder interferometer can form an OVA [19]. Huang et al. produced a composite vortex beam by coaxial superposition of Laguerre–Gaussian (LG) beams with common waist position and waist parameter [20]. In addition, the overlap of two Bessel beams can produce some special optical fields [21,22]. The OVA produced by the two overlapped optical beams is well suited for manipulation of microparticle [16]. In addition, with the introduction of the perfect vortex beam, M. K. Karahroudi et al. used the curved fork grating illuminated by the Bessel-Gaussian beam to generate perfect optical vortices [23]. In recent years, two concentric perfect optical vortices with different topological charge have been superimposed to create a new oval optical vortex array [24]. This new OVA structure facilitates the adjustment of the number of vortices and the radius of the circular array trajectory, paving the way for new applications in complex structured optical field conditions such as optical tweezers and micro-particle manipulation [16]. These methods can control the vortices to a certain extent, but these methods either generate a complex optical field by externally superimposing multiple vortices, which is inefficient and complex, or based on non-diffractive characteristics, the vortex array cannot produce high intensity gradients when propagating axially in the focal region, that limits its further application. Although Lin Li proposes a method to generate a more general and fancy OVA, in which all optical vortices are arranged along any curved path, However, the resulting controlled vortex array requires additional modulation and it is rather complicated, which making it more difficult to control the vortex array.
In this paper, we present a simple tunable vortex array of vortex beam emitter. In order to obtain a higher-order vortex optical, a copper wire that is placed in the laser that a self-designed open coaxial spherical resonator that is used control loss of diffraction. After all, high-order vortex light and vortex array light have an efficient effect on batch self-assembly of particles [25]. Then the number and distribution evolution of the optical vortex is controlled by using a simple method of tuning the distance between the another of double copper wire and the optical axis. In order to judge the existence of the vortex of the optical vortex emitted by the laser emitter, the lateral shear interferometry was added to the experiment. The number and position of the vortices are mainly judged by the interferogram, because the interference can verify the existence of the optical vortex on the dark point in the transverse mode [26]. The scheme not only simplifies the generation of complex optical fields, overcomes the disadvantages of the high intensity and gradient generated by the non-diffractive characteristics of the vortex array that unable propagate in the focal region axially, but also simplifies the experimental difficulty of generating a controllable vortex array. Of course, it may be further necessary to improve the accuracy of controlling the distribution position of the vortex array and generate an arbitrary vortex array in order to further improve the precision of the controllable vortex beam.
