The rapid development of voice language (computer-assisted language learning) processing personal computers technologies and software systems is now (L2) popular, especially for second languages. Learn a language by speaking only learning. Typically, the calling system involves the testing of both acceptance and production techniques procedures for a specific object. On the other hand, there are human professions that require a relatively difficult and time consuming normal voice or writing appraisal to evaluate writing and production writing. A subjective and time consuming method. With the advancement of automated voice recognition, computer-assisted pronunciation training systems can evaluate the quality of pronunciation provided by top-level users with a variety of voice features. Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) Acceptance of specific material Product skills include both practical testing. Marks are usually relatively easy to assess as practical reading and listening are welcome based on the choices of choosing the single or correct answer. In another band. Speaking Time the evaluation of the input signal during abdominal pain (speech or writing) is usually very subjective and the most difficult of the necessary human specialists, writing and time consuming. Evaluating product capabilities. Quality ratings on automatic pronunciation start from Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR). All of the above systems use a direct approach ASR sound model. These results in the sound model when the test drill is applied giving the highest score. However, the purpose of the ASR and the quality rating on the automatic pronunciation are different. The former is to give a pronounced phonetic sequence, even if fixed or painted in accent. Accents should distinguish pronunciation from the latter good ones. Systems that are meant to create sound models with non-standard text will thus reduce the extreme performance and give higher scores of coated speech. Therefore, many people only believe that the gold sound model is suitable for automatic pronunciation quality rating.
The optimization criterion is to minimize the average square error of the goal root between humans and machines. It will use both determination and pronunciation texts as such as parameter optimization protocols. The proposed developed algorithms require human stamped pronunciation level score that does not require a human stamped speech level score that is uniquely accessible and highly reliable., Learning a new language, listening, speaking, reading and writing is a basic skill, the basis of which is pronunciation. 21 initials are considered unit in basic pronunciation and there are 35 finals in China. They make up Chinese letters, words, and sentences. It is good when people start to learn Chinese to start them in this order. At that point, endeavor to present the final, letters and words of course in order to begin. Recognizing the first three of these is easier than words as it have proven to be a multi-recognition system from 0 to 9. Here, pronunciation recognition can be translated as converts a voice input into a string in considered the first part of voice recognition, based on a semantic knowledge and leaves. Part of the assessment is the time it takes to mark the quality of pronunciation together and provides a recognizable conclusion to a learner's scar. In addition, the scores obtained were provided by experts to make human-based assessments based on the ability to encrypt the HMMs' logarithms, and to study the relationship between them. Assess the pronunciation based on HMM's logarithm probability, then compare the machine scores, given by an expert to study the relationship between them.
