Modern construction materials and civil engineering techniques have made possible the construction of huge structures such as skyscrapers, long span bridges and offshore oil rigs. Inherently these structures possess very small damping ability against external forces such as seismic and wind. As a result, large deflection and acceleration responses result when they are subjected to environmental loads. The quest to solve this problem has made vibration control schemes an integral part of these modern structures [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], and [8].
There are number of mechanisms by which vibrations in tall structures can be controlled. These mechanisms can be grouped into three broad categories: (i) passive devices, (ii) active devices and (iii) hybrid devices. In this research work, we investigate the control of active tuned mass damper (ATMD) which is an active device. An ATMD consists of a tuned mass damper (TMD) and an actuator. TMD is a mass–spring-dashpot system. The mass oscillates at the frequency of the structure but with a phase shift. The energy is dissipated by the dashpot as relative motion develops between the mass and the structure. In ATMD, an actuator placed between the structure and the TMD system applies a computed force in real time [9]. A complete list of abbreviation is given in Table 1.Table 1. List of Acronyms.ATMDActive tuned mass damperARXAuto-regressive exogenousANFISAdaptive neuro fuzzy inference systemFLCFuzzy logic controllerFPEFinal prediction errorHILHardware-in-the-loopLQGLinear quadratic gaussianMPCModel predictive controllerNNNeural networkPRBSPseudo random binary sequenceSMCSliding mode controlTMDTuned mass damper
A number of different control algorithms have been explored [1], [10], [11], and implemented to enhance the performance of an ATMD. J. Wu and J. Yang [12] used the Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG), H∞, and continuous Sliding Mode Control (SMC) strategies, and found all the three successful at damping the vibrations. G. Pujol and L. Acho [13] employed H∞ control scheme for a flexible structure subject to ground perturbations and found this technique quite effective. H. J. Li et al. [14] used the H2 control for a structure subjected to wave loadings. Y. Ikeda et al. [15] used LQR control algorithm to control both lateral and torsional vibrations using two ATMDs. R. Guclu and H. Yazici [16] compared the classic PID controller and the Fuzzy Logic Controller(FLC) using ATMDs and found that the FLC outperforms PID. A. C. Nerves and R. Krishnan [17] proposed a neural network trained by back propagation algorithm that can successively reduce induced vibrations. R. Mitchell et al. [18] investigated wavelet-neuro-fuzzy control of active tuned mass damper system for structure under seismic excitation. G. Mei et al. [19] applied the Model Predictive Controller to vibration control of tall structure using ATMD. These works motivate further investigation along these lines. An important task that needs to be accomplished is the comparison of all these control strategies and finding out that which strategy is the final answer to the problem of vibration control.
Authors investigated different control techniques such as pole placement controller, state-space controller, fuzzy logic controllers to select the best controller for the given tall structure model. In the pole placement control method, control action introduced significant self-oscillations to the system along with additional minor non-linearity issue in controlling the vibration. The good feature of the state space pole placement control method is the rapid control, but it also introduces self-oscillations in the system and having minor non-linearity issue in the control of vibrations. So due to the self-oscillation, only the significant vibrations (i.e., due to the earthquake) can be handled but the minor oscillations (i.e., due to the air impact) cannot be handled. It is also noticed from the real system model that over a small introduced impact of force (vibration), the control system does not operate and no work is done to overcome such a minor vibration. Besides, the sampling interval of 0.25 s of the controller for such kind of application is very high. The control signal to minimize the vibration is between 2.3 to 4.4, i.e., 2.1  V.
Model predictive controller (MPC) always tries to minimize the vibration to zero even the natural vibration. Therefore, it is not a good technique for such kind of problem as compared to the fuzzy logic and causes self-oscillation problem as in the previous control algorithms of pole placement controller and state-space pole placement controller. Moreover, the reduction time of the controlled system with MPC is also more than the fuzzy logic controller. MPC with the neural network having extensive computational and sampling time as compared to the fuzzy logic but equal to the other control techniques, i.e., 0.25 s, which is not good for such kind of applications presented in the paper. But the good point of such technique is the voltage range of the control signal, (i.e., −0.5 to 0.5  V) is the same as the fuzzy logic controller.
To design the structural control systems, one has to consider many characteristics of the system to obtain an optimum solution. For example, in the case of large structure case study, several modes of different story levels, mainly the lower few modes have a great influence on responses. Therefore, for the active control of exciting structures, even though a structure has many vibration modes, control performance can be efficiently achieved by controlling selected critical modes. Control algorithms based on the modal synthesis, also known as modal space control, can be effectively used when only a few critical modes need to be controlled. In modal controls, each modal controller is designed separately in a reduced modal space and the control force for a given mode depends only on the modal response of that mode. An actuator is required for the process control of high tall buildings. The installation cost of the actuator is more than to implement and design of the controller. In the design of the controller, it is considered that the controller has a high performance by reducing the cost of the hardware like mass attached to the mass bus.
The neural network generates an efficient control law for a neural-network controller to present the reduced dynamic response of buildings exposed to earthquake-induced ground excitation and strong blow of air. With the help of the neural network, the input and output are easy to evaluate, even if the process is nonlinear. Therefore, the neural network is a nice tool that uses to deal with non-linearity problems. One of the main advantages of the neural network predictive controller (NNPC) is the possibility at the present sample instance, is the consideration of the future changes in the control signal. MPCs are not limited to discrete linear models and can be applied nicely on nonlinear continuous models.
For the training process of the neural network, some training data is required. For that purposes, the data from running the process by giving PRBS signal is utilized, as it was described in detail in [20]. Black box identification is the family of the standard models, i.e., ARX, ARMAX OE. The black box model consists of unknown parameters, which are estimated by using the data available. After getting the mathematical model, the next step is to develop the controller based on a nonlinear model of the neural network and the choice for that is the model predictive controller.
In the presented work, following are the key contributions;

1.The use of a neural network model predictive controller for vibration control of tall structures excited by wind and earthquake is proposed.2.To test and appraise the efficacy of the proposed technique, it is implemented on a scaled-down laboratory model of a tall structure.3.The proposed technique is also compared with two well researched controllers, i.e. pole placement and ANFIS controller. The controllers are then tested, validated and compared. To the best of authors’ knowledge, the neural network predictive controller has not been implemented and validated for an ATMD in literature.
The paper discusses the scaled down-model, which is being used as a replica of a tall building. The static and dynamic characteristics of the structure are identified using input–output data sets obtained from experiments performed on the scaled-down model. Also, pole-placement controllers are implemented by both polynomial and state-space methods. Fuzzy logic controller is implemented. It is converted to a neuro-fuzzy inference system and then trained using data obtained from the scaled-down model. A nonlinear ARX model of the structure is obtained, represented as a neural network and trained. It is then used with a predictive controller. The controllers are then tested, validated and compared. The response of the structure coupled with various controllers to excitation forces is presented as well.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the system scaled-down model. A detailed discussion of model identification and pole placement is presented in Section 3. Section 4 discusses about the neuro-fuzzy controller. Neural network predictive controller is proposed in Section 5. In Section 6, results are presented and discussed, and the concluding remarks are given in Section 7.
