In recent years, the role of wearable device is crucial in healthcare IoT field, as it enables the individual to get their health status information at their fingertip. The rise in the number of chronic disease patients who need continuous monitoring of their health status, has led to the rise and need for efficient ubiquitous monitoring technologies. Chronic diseases like cardiovascular disease (CVD) is one of the most common cause for death across the world [1]. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), by 2030, 23.6 million people may die due to CVD conditions every year. The CVD is diagnosed via long-term monitoring [2] of
ECG signal which is collected through wearables like smart watch, chest strap, wristbands. These wearable devices have constrained memory and energy resources but the signal transmission cost is high. Hence, it is required to utilize the memory and energy resources efficiently. In order to achieve this, the signals are compressed at the transmitter side where they are acquired (Edge Processing) before sending it to the physician to reduce the transmission cost. Also, the ECG signal gathered through these wearable devices mainly suffers from noisy inference caused due to the body movement of the particular subject wearing that device. So, this work is concerned about to promote long-term monitoring by reducing the transmission cost and denoising the signal simultaneously. This is achieved by designing lightweight and efficient algorithm for compressing and denoising the ECG signal with better reconstruction quality.
To promote long-term monitoring, several approaches like Online Dictionary (OD) [5], Vector Quantization (VQ) [6], Self-Organizing Map (SOMP) [7], Principle Component Analysis (PCA) [8] are proposed and they focused on compressing the signal to reduce the transmission cost. OD and VQ are efficient online learning compression algorithms but the size of the dictionary grows, as it learns the new incoming data. Memory constrained devices will not be adequate for growing dictionary size. SOMP and PCA are the best algorithms to compress the data but they are computationally intensive. Since they are linearly modelled, they are not efficient to learn the deep representation of large complex dataset.
Hence, the algorithm that suits light weight devices for real time application must meet these following requirements. First, the algorithm should be modelled with non-linear neural network to learn the deep representation of complex data. Secondly, the algorithm should not be computationally intensive. Thirdly, the trained network model should not grow when it meets the new incoming data in the real time scenario. Hence it must be an offline trained model. In the intervening time, significant attention has been paid on ECG signal denoising. Conventional methods like Wavelets [3], closed-loop approach [4] focus only on denoising ECG signal but it distorts the reconstructed waveform of ECG and it may lead to misdiagnosis.
Hooshmand et al. [9] proves that a non-linear neural network called Denoising Autoencoder (DAE) compress and denoise the ECG signal simultaneously with better reconstruction quality. Through, DAE the ECG signal can be compressed efficiently to reduce the transmission cost and in turn, boosts the battery life of wearables for long-term monitoring. Recently, Convolutional DAE [10,11] and Fully Convolutional based DAE [12] are proposed for ECG signal compressing with higher compression ratio (CR) of 34 but the proposed work achieves CR of 64. However, the existing work concentrates only on compression efficiency and reconstruction quality of the ECG signal, but they did not pay much attention on energy consumption of the algorithm. It is important to consider the runtime of the algorithm, as it is designed for light weight wearable devices. So, the proposed work focusses on energy consumption of the algorithm and recovery quality of the ECG signal as well.
To achieve this, an edge computing based novel approach that combines Convolutional Denoising Autoencoder (CDAE) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) is proposed. A single layered forward pass LSTM network is added to the end of the encoder section of CDAE, instead of applying several convolutional filters and pooling layers that are actually required to achieve CR of 64. The reduced total number of filters and layers may lessen the number of trainable parameters that may reduce the runtime of the algorithm. Moreover, the ECG signal considered for this work is one-dimensional time series data. In order to reconstruct the time series data, it is essential to learn the temporal dependencies between the data samples whereas CDAE can learn only the spatial correlations between the data. In recent studies, researchers have paid more attention on developing LSTM network to address the long-term dependency issues in EEG based Motor Imagery Tasks [13,14]. LSTM is a promising to learn order dependencies between the time series which helps to reconstruct the target data.
As the LSTM layer learns the temporal correlations between the featured data produced by CDAE, a better reconstruction Quality Score (QS) of 15.61 has been achieved than existing work, with reduced run time. This shows that designated algorithm is lightweight which will be suitable for resource constrained wearable devices. The proposed method can denoise the ECG signal simultaneously from its noisy version efficiently with better accuracy as it employs the DAE architecture. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The basic framework of CDAE and LSTM is introduced in Section II. The proposed methodology CDAE-LSTM is explained in Section III. The experimental results obtained from MIT-BIH Arrhythmias Database are presented in Section IV. The discussion of this experiment is carried out in Section V. Finally, the work is concluded in Section VI.
