Drought is one of the most severe natural disaster that causes extensive damage to natural ecosystem leading to socio-economic drought. Climate change and unpredictable future weather conditions will aggravate the frequency of drought affected regions. The loss of 2014 California drought has been estimated at USD 2.2 billion including USD 1.5 billion direct agricultural loss [1]. Canada lost USD 2.34 billion Gross Domestic Product due to 2001–02 drought [2]. Furthermore, Kenya in 2008–11 drought, reported USD 12.1 billion economic loss to which livestock makes the highest share [3].
The reported losses have escalated the need to make transition from reactive to proactive approach by predicting the future incidents. Induced by a broad variety of climatic, environmental and hydrological factors, comprehensive drought prediction is a complex task. Several drought indices for a wide range of time-scales have been formulated to quantize the degree of drought intensity [4], [5]. Some drought evoking attributes need long-term monitoring and Standard Precipitation Index (SPI) is widely used to predict drought over 1–36 months time frames. Standard Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index (SPEI) has been used to capture climate change by considering evapotranspiration. Other indices like Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), Palmer Drought Severity Index (PDSI) have been extended to reflect as many as drought inducing elements. But there does not exist a system that can take real-time information from all the causing variables, perform a comprehensive analysis to assess the severity scale and applicable in any of the regions around the world. The amalgamation of cloud computing and Internet of Things (IoT) can attain this as IoT makes it work globally and cloud computing provides mammoth amount of computational capacity to process data [6], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Fog computing renders computing power at nearby location for expedited results.
The sensor nodes with small size and low energy abilities can work for a limited time period. Replacement of batteries at unapproachable regions on a frequent basis is a tedious task [11]. Moreover, there is need of sustainable sensor deployment approach that can give accurate results with usage of least number of nodes. In the proposed framework, a sustainable sensor deployment approach that places sensors at the locations that give less redundant information is used. An energy conserving mechanism is employed at fog layer to determine next active and passive time slots according to previous collected data variability. IoT sensors are placed to collect the concerned drought evoking attributes and cloud computing provides all the capabilities to preform drought evaluation and prediction. The main contributions of this paper are

1.Novel Sustainable sensor deployment scheme to reduce redundant data.2.Energy Conserving Sleep Scheduling mechanism at the fog layer for enhanced sensor active lifetime.3.Spatio-temporal analysis of the data to calculate severity level of drought.4.Future drought prediction at various time-scales at Cloud layer.5.Information Dissemination to Drought monitoring organizations.
The remaining paper is structured into following sections. Section 2 elaborates some of the important studies that have been done on drought prediction and evaluation. Section 3 demonstrates the proposed sustainable architecture for drought severity evaluation and prediction. Experimental set-up, results and its analysis has been presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
