Full understanding of a user health status can be a very useful goal, but on a technological and scientific level it is a sophisticated process requiring contributions from disciplines such as computer vision, human cognition, and psychology. Effectively and automatically understanding a user satisfaction level can facilitate many applications in our life. For example, in interior design, designers must understand very well the clients’ health-related attributes, based on which they can design solutions that can satisfy them. To give a typical example, designers should first determine the decoration style based on the client preferences, e.g., “simple”, “continental”, or “new classic”. Afterwards, they can design the interior spatial layout associated with the detailed furniture styles. Finally, the designers will continuously update the decoration in order to maximize the client satisfaction. As another example, in a clothes recommendation App, we could need an intelligent sub-system to automatically predict the user’s health level that is suitable to each outfit. This health level may be determined by multiple factors, for instance the user living habits, ethnicity, friends, and dress occasions, to name a few. It is clear that a proper combination of such factors may be used for health level prediction.
Besides the own health-related status of each person, users’ global health level is remarkably determined by the surrounding companions. This is because humans are naturally social animals, and they tend to consult with their friends when they discover health-related attributes. However, the design of a system that optimally detects the social attributes for each user is a challenging task. Potential difficulties are threefold: (1) Automatic detection of the companions for each user inside the same social network; (2) Proper fusion of each user’s own health results with those coming from friends; and (3) Each user may belong to multiple social networks, e.g., Facebook, Twitter, and Wechat.
The problem of finding a way to seamlessly and collaboratively combine the health levels calculated by different types of social networks remains unsolved. , A number of user health level assessment algorithms have been proposed in the computer vision and visual cognition communities. They typically extract multiple medical attributes from each user’s health-related data to train a model for evaluating the health status. These methods are simple and effective in some contexts. Nevertheless, they are still insufficient due to the following reasons:

(1)There are several million Internet users distributed on the most popular social networks. Their relationships can be represented by a very large graph with many vertices. However, the discovery of each user’s companions on such a massive-scale graph is a highly time-consuming task. In practice, traditional graph clustering algorithms may require days to discover subgraphs on million-scale social networks. Therefore, we need a highly efficient clustering algorithm to handle this kind of graphs. Even worse, there may be a few users not belonging to any social network but appear related to this user, e.g., users who only registered, but never visited the social network afterward. This motivates us to formulate a graph clustering algorithm that can supports outliers. Nevertheless, the design of such a clustering algorithm is a challenge.(2)To our best knowledge, there are no publicly available and large-scale user health datasets that can be used to evaluate our method. An on the other hand, compiling such a massive-scale dataset requires a lot of human work. In practice, we need to design a crawler App and spend months to collect the user health profiles from million-scale user network. As far as we know, many social network platforms do not support crawler Apps. Therefore, we have to customize one crawler for each popular social network. And more importantly, user health level is a subjective metric. We would have to recruit hundreds of volunteers to label the ground-truth health level during experimental validation. Handling such a task is very difficult.
To successfully tackle or at least alleviate these problems, we propose a novel user health level categorization algorithm by optimally fusing the assessment results from multiple social networks. An overview of our proposed framework is shown in Fig. 1. Given a rich number of online users, we first extract the multiple visual, textual, and acoustic features to represent the attributes of each user. Subsequently, we construct a massive-scale affinity graph to characterize the sophisticated relationships among users. Then, an efficiently graph clustering algorithm, the Graph Shift [1], is formulated to efficiently discover the companions among different users. The Graph Shift can naturally support outliers, and therefore users not belonging to any social network can be tolerated. Based on the discovered social networks, we obtain the user health level from the multiple social networks by applying a multi-class SVM classifier. Finally, a multi-view learning paradigm is proposed to combine the health levels from the multiple social networks, where the weight of each social network is dynamically determined. In this way, we obtain the final fused healthy level of each user. Comprehensive experimental results on our collected very-large-scale human health dataset have demonstrated the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach.
The main contributions of this work can be summarized in the following three points: (1) A novel user healthy level prediction algorithm that takes advantage of multiple social networks, whereas conventional methods only exploit each user’s own medical-related profile; (2) An efficient graph management platform that supports subgraph mining on a million-scale affinity graph, based on which each user’s companions can be well discovered; and (3) A million-scale user profile dataset collected for experimental validation, where each user can be a member of multiple social networks, such as Facebook and Wechat.Download : Download high-res image (601KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. An overview of our proposed socially-aware user health level prediction (Each red circle indicates the discovered social network for a user).
The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly review the main previous works and clarify the differences between them. In Section 3, we detail our proposed medically-aware user health level prediction algorithm by introducing the technical details of the three key contributions. Section 4 empirically validates our proposed method and demonstrates its superiority. The last section concludes and suggests some future work.
