Young children often extend known words to referents outside their vocabulary, a phenomenon known as overextension (Clark, 1978). For example, children might extend dog to refer to a squirrel, ball to refer to a balloon, or key to refer to a door. Overextension takes place typically between 1 and 2.5 years in child development (Clark, 1973) and evidences early capacity for lexical innovation under communicative and cognitive pressures. Work in linguistics and developmental psychology has made important discoveries about overextension (Bloom, 1973; Clark, 1973; Clark, 1978; Rescorla, 1980; Vygotsky, 1962), but to our knowledge there exists no formal coherent account that synthesizes these ideas to explain the wide array of behaviors in overextension, both in terms of children's production and comprehension (see Fig. 1 for an illustration). Here we present a computational framework for characterizing the origins of word meaning extension that connects different findings about overextension in the literature.Download : Download high-res image (220KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Illustration of overextension in child-caretaker communication. Production: The child chooses to extend the meaning of a known word— ball in this scenario—to refer to the object balloon, word for which has not yet entered the child's vocabulary. Comprehension: The child, as a listener, must infer the meaning of the caretaker's utterance— balloon—given possible confounding referents in the environment (e.g., a ball).
Vygotsky (Vygotsky, 1962) describes overextension as a crucial stage of early concept formation. In his classic example, a child first uttered quah to refer to a duck in a pond, then to bodies of water, to liquids in general, including milk in a bottle, as well as to a coin with an eagle imprinted on it, and subsequently other round, coin-like objects. Vygotsky's work provides an anecdotal account of overextension and resonates with work in philosophy and cognitive linguistics suggesting how word meanings involve rich but perplexing semantic relations [e.g.,Lakoff, 1987; Wittgenstein, 1953]. However, this account does not specify the conceptual basis and mechanism that give rise to the word choices that children produce in overextension.
A study by Rescorla (Rescorla, 1980) extends the early work by suggesting that children's lexical production of overextension relies on rich conceptual knowledge. In her diary study of six children, Rescorla has identified three main types of semantic relations that connect conventional and overextended referents of a word, described as 1) categorical relation: overextension by linking objects within a taxonomy (e.g., dog referring to a squirrel); 2) analogical relation: overextension by linking objects with shared visual or other perceptual properties (e.g., ball referring to an apple); and 3) predicate-based relation: overextension by linking objects that co-occur frequently in the environment (e.g., key referring to a door).
Separate from the literature that documents children's overextension from the perspective of lexical production [e.g., Barrett, 1978; Clark, 1973, Rescorla, 1980], several studies have shown that children's lexical comprehension also exhibits the property of overextension, and there are important behavioral differences in terms of overextensional production and comprehension. In particular, children tend to misintepret the meaning of a word by overextending to other (related or confounding) referents in the environment (Chapman & Thomson, 1980; Mervis & Canada, 1983; Thomson & Chapman, 1977). The extent that overextension behavior in comprehension mirrors that in production has been a subject of controversy (Chapman & Thomson, 1980; Fremgen & Fay, 1980; Mervis & Canada, 1983), but one observation persists (Behrend, 1988; Naigles & Gelman, 1995): children often overextend in production even when they correctly infer the appropriate adult word in comprehension, i.e., there exists a production-comprehension asymmetry such that comprehension tends to mature earlier than production in development. For example, Rescorla (Rescorla, 1980) reports a child who consistently identified the correct referent upon hearing the word strawberry, but would still overextend the word apple to refer to strawberries in production. This asymmetry reflects the general trend that comprehension leads production in language development (Clark & Hecht, 1983), but it remains debated whether comprehension and production rely on two separate systems or a single system (Pickering & Garrod, 2013).
Although several hypotheses have been proposed to explain the mechanisms behind overextension as well as the relationship between production and comprehension, existing views are mixed as to the explanation of overextension in terms of: 1) incomplete conceptual system (Clark, 1973; Kay & Anglin, 1982; Mervis, 1987), 2) pragmatic choice under limited vocabulary (Bloom, 1973), and 3) retrieval error (Fremgen & Fay, 1980; Gershkoff-Stowe, 2001; Huttenlocher, 1974; Thomson & Chapman, 1977). The first view poses children's immature conceptual development as the root of overextension, suggesting that children overextend words because their developing conceptual system cannot yet distinguish concepts to the extent that adult words do. This explanation addresses the semantic aspect of lexical innovation, but not the production-comprehension asymmetries, since incomplete conceptual knowledge alone could not explain words being correctly understood but not produced. The other two views focus on this latter aspect by suggesting that children overextend words either as a communicative strategy when they lack the proper vocabulary and thus rely on an approximation to accomplish their communicative goals, or due to performance errors caused by the cognitive effort of retrieving unfamiliar words. However, these theories do not propose a formal model to explain the conceptual leaps that children make when they do overextend words in production or comprehension.
We present a formal approach to child overextension that is aimed at explaining the various findings about this phenomenon under a coherent view. We propose a general computational framework that models child overextension both in terms of production and comprehension, and we evaluate this framework rigorously against empirical findings reported previously from naturalistic and lab settings.
We focus on modeling the overextension of nouns which represent a broad class of concepts in the lexicon. We contribute a new dataset of 236 noun pairs (i.e., noun-referent) collected from the literature which we have made publicly available (see Supplementary Material). We show that our computational framework not only explains children's overextended word choices over different semantic modalities, but with no further modification it also replicates the empirical findings about production and comprehension from independent psychological experiments. Our framework shows that overextension in both production and comprehension can be explained by inferential processes on common conceptual knowledge, thus providing support for the single-system view of language production and comprehension.
Although we focus our experiments and discussion on presenting a unified model that explains overextension in production and comprehension, it is worth highlighting that our work can also be seen as a more general framework of reference from which overextension follows. We elaborate on this view in our second set of experiments, which shows that our model can predict both correct and overextended production and comprehension following empirical findings, and in Supplementary Material, in which we show how a longitudinal simulation of our model can suggest developmental trajectories from early overextension to adult concept formation and reference.
