A large group of degenerative diseases, known as amyloidosis, is caused by protein misfolding and deposition in tissues in the form of amyloid fibrils. In the human body, many different peptides and proteins were shown to form pathological amyloid aggregates, and fibrillation is often considered as a generic property of a polypeptide chain (Uversky & Fink, 2006). While the structure of the amyloidogenic proteins in the native state is different, the aggregation process is always driven by the assembly of the β-sheet structural elements. One of the possible mechanisms of fibrillation involves partial unfolding of the protein with formation of a β-sheet rich structure, which undergoes further aggregation (Cao, Jiang, & Han, 2017). Thus, compounds that can bind to β-structural fragments of proteins may be useful both for preventing the fibril formation and disruption of existing amyloid aggregates (Wang et al., 2013). Different proteins are extensively used to study the process of amyloid fibril formation. One of such proteins is hen egg white lysozyme (hereinafter lysozyme), which is well characterized in both functional and structural aspects. It is a small 14 kDa enzyme with pI ∼10.5 whose three-dimensional structure was firstly resolved in 1965 (Blake et al., 1965). The spatial structure of lysozyme is organized in two domains, the first one consists of four α-helices and the second one contains three strands of antiparallel β-sheets. One of the natural lysozyme functions is the oligosaccharide hydrolysis. The active site of the enzyme is situated in the cleft between two domains. The oligosaccharide ligand bound to this center interacts with protein β-sheets (Dreele, 2005). Moreover, there are some known examples of fibril disaggregation and inhibition of fibrillation of different proteins, including lysozyme, under the influence of oligo- and polysaccharides (Dai et al., 2015; Sakuragi, Shimada, Sakurai, & Shinkai, 2006; Olasehinde, Mabinya, Olaniranc, & Okoha, 2019; Zhou et al., 2020), while in some cases polysaccharides promoted fibril formation (Bravo et al., 2008; Valle-Delgado et al., 2010). These results drive the interest in unraveling the structural aspects of complexation between lysozyme and carbohydrates.
There are many other insufficiently studied aspects of protein-polysaccharide interactions. Protein-polysaccharide complexes are ubiquitous in living organisms and provide the basis for numerous bio-inspired technological materials (Bealer et al., 2020). In medicine, these complexes are used as scaffolds mimicking extracellular matrix for cell encapsulation (Gasperini, Mano, & Reis, 2014) and as the carriers for drug delivery systems (Huang et al., 2020; Yampol’skaya, Elenskii, Pan’kina, Tarasevich, & Kulichikhin, 2009). Despite a growing interest in the macroscopic properties of protein-polysaccharide mixtures and their applications, the information about the underlying structural reorganization of biomacromolecules upon the complex formation and the molecular details of their interactions is rather scarce.
The mixtures of proteins and polysaccharides often undergo phase separation. They can segregate into different phases due to thermodynamic incompatibility or coacervate with the formation of polymer-rich and solvent-rich phases in the case of favorable association (Schmitt & Turgeon, 2010). The possibility of coacervation in a protein-polysaccharide system is mainly governed by electrostatic interactions and strongly depends on pH and ionic strength as well as on concentrations of both macromolecules. For lysozyme complexes coacervation has been observed upon its admixture to different anionic polysaccharides, including κ-carrageenan (Antonov, Zhuravleva, Cardinaels, & Moldenaers, 2018; Souza, da Costa, Souza, Tosin, & Garcia-Rojas, 2018; Souza, Souza, Heckert Bastos, & Garcia-Rojas, 2018; Xu et al., 2018), heparin (van de Weert, Andersen, & Frokjaer, 2004) and pectin (Souza, da Costa et al., 2018, Souza, Souza et al., 2018). Upon mixing of κ-carrageenan and lysozyme, the coacervation with the formation of insoluble complexes was observed in a wide pH range (1.0–12.0) (Souza, da Costa et al., 2018, Souza, Souza et al., 2018). The maximum yield of coacervate was observed at the mass ratio lysozyme/κ-carrageenan 3:1 (Antonov et al., 2018; Souza, da Costa et al., 2018, Souza, Souza et al., 2018) and amounted to 93.7 % ± 4.8 %. The DSC experiments with lysozyme-carrageenan complexes conducted by Antonov et al. (2018) indicate that the complex has a lower melting temperature than pure lysozyme. This result means stronger binding of κ-carrageenan with the denatured form of the protein than with the native one. However, the molecular structure of such complexes is still to be established (Souza, da Costa et al., 2018, Souza, Souza et al., 2018). The aim of the current study is to give a structural insight into complexation between κ-carrageenan and lysozyme. We hypothesize that the complexation results in lysozyme structure reorganization with an increase in β-structure content depending on the structural state of κ-carrageenan.
κ-Carrageenan is a linear polysaccharide extracted from red seaweed (Rhodophyta), mainly from Kappaphycus alvarezii (cottonii). The primary structure of κ-carrageenan consists of alternating α(1–3)-d-galactopyranose (G) and β-(1–4)-3,6-anhydro-d-galactopyranose (A) units with one sulfate group in the 4th position of galactopyranose ring (Fig. 1). The spatial structural motif of the κ-carrageenan chain is a threefold right-handed helix, as was derived from theoretical calculations (Le Questel, Cros, Mackie, & Perez, 1995) and from X-ray pattern of oriented fibers of its near analogue i-carrageenan (Anderson, Campbell, Harding, Rees, & Samuel, 1969). It is generally accepted that κ-carrageenan chains associate into a parallel inter-twisted double helix (Morris, Rees, & Robinson, 1980). At low concentrations or upon heating, the polysaccharide chain acquires more flexibility and adopts a random coil conformation. Recently, using multivariate analysis we reported clearly distinct orthogonal FTIR-spectra which distinguished helix and coil conformations of κ-carrageenan (Makshakova, Faizullin, & Zuev, 2020). In the present study, we apply FTIR-spectroscopy to κ-carrageenan-lysozyme complexes to simultaneously follow the structural alteration of both protein and polysaccharide, which becomes possible owing to the fact that some of their bands do not overlap. Further, to provide an atomistic model of complexes and evaluate the binding preferences of κ-carrageenan to native and partially denatured lysozyme, molecular docking was applied. Non-native structures of lysozyme were obtained using accelerated molecular dynamics simulations.Download : Download high-res image (62KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Structure of disaccharide fragment of κ-carrageenan.
We believe that fundamental understanding of protein-polysaccharide interactions and the mechanisms of their structural adjustment upon complexation will create a basis for the development of approaches for the regulation of amyloid aggregation.
