Nowadays, the computer network has become increasingly complex and the sharing of digital media is exposed to illegal manipulation. There is therefore a real problem of securing the information transmission. The transfer of sensitive data cannot be done with such risks and must therefore be secured. Several methods have been deployed to alleviate this problem [1]. Cryptography has long been the effective tool used to protect and secure information by transmitting encrypted data [2]. It thus offers solutions to protect the confidentiality of data, to ensure its integrity or to ascertain the identity of the person sending it [3]. But these protections only act during transmission and distribution. Once the data is in clear, it no longer contains any protection. This is why other protection techniques have been implemented [4]. These are concealment techniques which aim to offer permanent protection even when the data is in clear and therefore usable or is exposed to certain manipulations [5]. The watermarking technique aims to mark documents by inserting invisible but above all robust data. One of the particularities of this technique is that the mark is linked in an intimate and resistant way to the content of the document [6]. It is often dedicated to the protection of copyrights, when the watermark is robust. The imperceptibility, robustness and capacity of the mark are the important properties that characterize the watermarking technique [7]. Robustness ensures that the invisible mark cannot be destroyed without the medium being severely degraded [8]. Invisibility or imperceptibility indicates that, even when inserting secret information, the watermarked document (containing the secret information) is visibly undisturbed and capability indicates how much information can be inserted without being visible [9]. These properties are closely related but have the opposite effect. If the capacity is large, it has a positive effect on robustness but a negative effect on imperceptibility and vice versa [10]. Thus, the technique is closely dependent on the solution that manages the robustness / imperceptibility trade-off. We are facing a challenge in terms of optimization. A large majority of research work has been devoted to improving this trade-off by implementing increasingly advanced techniques [11]. In this work, we propose a substitution scheme for audio watermarking based on the Fourier transform. This scheme will include two variants in which a transform is applied. The parity of the obtained coefficients will then be combined in order to hide the watermark in the mid-frequency band. The aim is to make as little modification as possible in order to preserve the imperceptibility of the concealment process. An inverse transform will then generate the watermarked file. In our experiments several variants of the Fourier transform will be used, we will thus apply a discrete Fourier transform, a fractional Fourier transform and a Quaternion Fourier transform. For each transform, both variants of our watermarking scheme will be applied and the results obtained will allow us to determine which transform is the most suitable for our integration process. A comparison of the results obtained with related work will also allow us to situate and evaluate our approach. The paper is organized as follows, the concepts of Discret Fourier Transform, Fractional Fourier Transform and Quaternion discrete Fourier transform are briefly described in section 2, section 3 will review the various related works that we will use for comparison, and section 4 describes the proposed approach and the two possible variants. Section 5 will present the experiments conducted and the results obtained. Finally, the conclusion of our work and the perspectives are proposed in section 6.
