Alzheimer’s disease (AD), the most common cause of dementia, is one of the most prevalent causes of mortality in the United States. In 2018, AD accounted for 30.5 deaths per 100,000 people nationwide [1]. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is abnormal cognitive decline beyond expected decline of normal aging that represents a prodromal stage of AD with an estimated community prevalence of 21% for those over age 65 [2]. The rate of progression to AD in people with MCI is an estimated 10–15% per year, which is much higher than the rate of 1%–2% seen in general population [3,4]. However, early diagnosis remains a difficult task. By the time AD is diagnosed, sufficient neuronal injury has occurred to the extent that reversal of the disease is unlikely [5]. In this paper, we developed a new method for early diagnosis of MCI and AD that coupled with emerging therapies, could help intervene and slow, or perhaps even halt, the progression [6].
Current clinical practices typically use cognitive tests, such as Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) [7], to screen patients for MCI and AD. The challenge with these cognitive tests is that they may not be efficient at identifying early-stages of cognitive impairment because when applied to general populations, the cutoff scores have to be adjusted for each individual according to education level and cultural background and may be less sensitive to subtle cognitive changes and activities of daily living in the earlier stages of cognitive impairment [8]. Moreover, these tests require training for proper administration and are usually performed after cognitive decline becomes noticeable or is offered as a complaint by the patient or a family member. Less than half of older adults are currently screened and diagnosed for cognitive decline, and impairment is most frequently diagnosed at the mild-to-moderate stages of disease [9]. The focus of this study was to develop an MCI and AD detection method that can be performed by primary providers who may be untrained or uncomfortable performing cognitive assessments [10].
Gait has been shown to have a robust relationship with cognition [11,12]. Unlike cognitive tests, gait assessment is a common component of physical examinations across a variety of medical disciplines. Walking is a process that requires memory, executive function, motor coordination, and attention, and hence dual-task gait, which refers to walking while performing an attention-demanding task, has shown to be affected more in individuals with cognitive impairment than in those without cognitive deficits [13]. Therefore, the dual-task assessment has been used to detect individuals with an abnormal cognitive decline via assessment of decline in performance from single- (e.g. walking) to dual-task walking tests (e.g., walking while subtracting) [14]. However, most studies investigated the association between gait performance and cognitive decline using statistical approaches [15,16]. They used methods such as analysis of variance to identify aspects of gait that significantly change with increased cognitive load without providing an aggregated model to discriminate AD or MCI subjects from the healthy controls. We hypothesize that using machine learning approaches we could translate automatically and objectively the gait data from the dual-task assessments into clinically actionable knowledge about an individuals’ cognitive state. Our rationale is that developing a model that does not require cognitive testing and is solely based on gait assessments may lead to more effective cognitive screening and diagnostic tools that can be easily adapted into the clinical care setting [17].
The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we extract existing and novel gait features from the single and dual-tasking gait data and determine the gait features that are important in developing a machine learning-based detection of healthy, MCI, and AD groups. Second, we develop a machine learning technique that associates these significant gait features from the single and dual-tasking gait to a clinical diagnosis: AD, MCI, or healthy. Our approach is novel because to our best knowledge, no research study has explored the advantage of machine learning techniques on dual-task gait assessment data to detect MCI and AD subjects. Machine learning has been shown to be successful in detecting MCI subjects using different types of subjects' data such as MRI, diffusion tensor imaging, and electroencephalogram (EEG) (reviewed in [18]). However, these methods rely on expensive clinical protocols to collect data with extensive infrastructure and expensive medical equipment. Our technique can objectively detect subjects with AD or MCI from healthy subjects based on the gait data as the subjects perform a series of single and dual-task assessments. This will enable tools that can be performed by primary providers to detect MCI or AD subjects without using subjective cognitive assessments
