Cyber–physical systems (CPSs) are multidimensional, complex systems that integrate computers, networks, and physical environments. Through the organic integration deep collaboration of 3C (computation, communication, and control) technologies, the real-time perception, dynamic control, and information servicing of large engineering systems are realized [1], [2], [3]. A CPS realizes the integrated design of computation, communication, and physical systems, and this can make the system reliable, efficient, and capable of real-time collaboration, leading to important and extensive application prospects. CPSs are used in various fields and industries. The information technology industry has rapidly developed throughout the 21st century. Breakthroughs and innovations of various technologies have sprung up, causing earth-shaking changes in human life. Especially during its vigorous development process, embedded technology is frequently used in people’s lives [4]. CPSs have become one of the important research and development directions for scholars from various countries due to its interactive, extensible, and scalable features, and it has also become a priority investment area for major companies [5], [6]. Compared with embedded technology, a CPS, as a fusion of physical equipment and computer technology, transforms computing objects from digital to analog, discrete to continuous, and distributed to unified [7]. Compared with the Internet of Things, based on the perception ability of a CPS after the interconnection of its physical entities, more attention is given to the ongoing or dynamic information control of the main body of the device and information services [8]. Compared with software systems, a CPS focuses on the control and feedback of various physical processes, emphasizing the interaction and dynamic response of information processing [9].
A CPS can make good use of the effectiveness of artificial intelligence. A CPS possesses the characteristics of intelligence and autonomy. It not only extracts information about the external environment and other aspects but also processes the obtained information to a certain degree. Finally, the effective information required by the system is obtained, and the system can then react to the environment. From the perspective of characteristics, a CPS exhibits feasibility; therefore, the integration of a CPS and artificial intelligence is also feasible [10], [11]. In buildings, the combination of artificial intelligence and a CPS has many advantages. For example, in an indoor environment, if the temperature in the environment is high, the combined system of artificial intelligence and the CPS can sense the information in the environment and respond accordingly, such as by turning on the air conditioner, thereby displaying the advantages of combining the two components.
The principal objective of this study is to fuse architecture and artificial intelligence to meet the current vision of the construction industry in the real world. Therefore, the integration of a CPS and artificial intelligence in a building environment is explored to provide a theoretical basis and practical reference materials for the development of the intelligent construction industry.
