The first seizure clinic model of care enables prompt specialist assessment by a neurologist following a first suspected seizure, facilitating rapid diagnosis of seizure versus mimic (King et al., 1998). The model has been adopted in most major metropolitan centres for epilepsy management in Australia and other countries. It achieves high rates of diagnostic accuracy (King et al., 1998) but relies on access to a tertiary hospital with sub-specialty epilepsy expertise. This limits the availability of the service for people in outer-metropolitan, rural and remote areas, and those who find accessing hospital-based services difficult for social, practical or emotional reasons.
Telehealth has the potential to make an important contribution to first seizure care by improving access, and facilitating early assessment, management and advice; care which empowers people to effectively self-manage after experiencing a first seizure (Foster et al., 2019). Telehealth enables a medical consultation to be performed using a secure digital platform with audio and visual communication between specialist neurologist and patient, and in some cases can also include other people such as a carer, less specialised physicians or primary healthcare provider (Kissani et al., 2020).
Although telehealth provides many benefits for patients and health services (Jennett et al., 2003), adoption has been limited, in part due to its complexity (Ekeland et al., 2010). Uptake has been accelerated in 2020 out of necessity for physical distancing, isolation and rationalisation of on-site health care resources during the COVID-19 pandemic, but there are still many questions about its practicality, acceptability and effectiveness in different settings. In epilepsy care, feasibility of telehealth has been reported for review appointments (Ahmed et al., 2008) and for inpatient consultations (Craig et al., 2000), but not for first seizure clinic. Given the rapid transition to delivery of telehealth for all care it is important to investigate the feasibility of telehealth for the first consultation, not just ongoing care. The application of telehealth to outpatient epilepsy care is considered to have “the potential of addressing limited resources and improving access to people with epilepsy across the globe”(p.1) but is underutilised (Kissani et al., 2020).
The aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of providing outpatient appointments in first seizure clinic by telehealth to patients living in both metropolitan and regional areas of a large health network.
