The requirement of high-rate backhaul is dramatically grown with the rapid generation of diverse applications (such as digital high-definition video transmission, virtual reality, etc.). These transmission requirements are difficult to be satisfied by the existing network although the development and evolution of mobile communication has been greatly improved in many aspects, such as network throughput, transmission capacity and utilization of spectrum resources (Xiao et al., 2017). Although a few researches on wireless backhaul solution have been focused on sub-6GHz band in the past, multi-hops wireless backhaul in the traditional microwave band has not been deployed and applied in large scale due to the following included but not limited reasons. Firstly, the network scalability is too low due to the long period of the deployment and maintenance for macro base stations. Secondly, there will be many intricate problems (e.g., the hidden terminal problem and the exposed terminal problem) resulted from the multi-hops transmission scheduling and routing with microwave omnidirectional transmission characteristics. Thirdly, huge network overhead and reduced system performance (e.g., the network power consumption and the network capacity) may be caused by the maintenance for the interference-limited multi-hops microwave backhaul.
Millimeter wave (mm-wave) is favored by 5G system due to the large amount of available bandwidth resources. However, great challenges are faced in the practical application of mm-wave communication because of its sensitivity to obstructions and its severe propagation path loss (Feng et al., 2016). For example, the free-space propagation path loss in 60 GHz mm-wave is 28 dB lower than that of the conventional 2.4 GHz (Kusaladharma et al., 2019). It has been agreed in the academia and industry that high directional transmission beams are formed at the transceiver with the help of massive MIMO technology for the mitigation and elimination of the serious path losses in mm-wave. Fortunately, it is feasible to package a large number of inexpensive and compact mm-wave antennas in space-limited transceiver with the rapid development of complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) radio frequency integrated circuits and the extremely short wavelengths of mm-wave. As a result, the opportunity of rapid and large-scale application for mm-wave communication is afforded. Correspondingly, some mm-wave communication standards (e.g., IEEE 802.11ad, IEEE 802.15.3c and ECMA-387) have been laid down in good time by the international organization for standardization (ISO) in the field of the wireless personal area network (WPAN) and wireless local area network (WLAN) (Wang et al., 2018).
It is necessary to deploy millimeter wave small cell station (mm-wave SCS) densely in the area of macro station (MS) for the requirement of ubiquitous access and massive traffic backhaul due to the short transmission distance. Thus, an ultra-dense deployment mm-wave mesh backhaul network (mm-wave MBN) is formed. A typical scenario of ultra-dense deployment mm-wave MBN is shown in Fig. 1, where some mm-wave SCSs are selected with certain criteria and connected to the core network with dedicated optical fibers due to the cost of the network construction and maintenance. In our paper, the fiber-enabled SCSs are called F-SCSs, and the other general SCSs are called G-SCSs. User traffic of G-SCSs are transmitted to the selected F-SCSs with mm-wave wireless communication. The scenario presented in Fig. 1 is suitable for large shopping malls, transportation hubs and other hot spots. In the scenario, user equipments (UE) are associated with the mm-wave SCSs respectively. User traffic are transmitted to the gateway (usually co-located with F-SCSs) through single or multi-hops wireless backhaul, and then are transmitted to the core network. Due to the limited transmission distance of mm-wave, the coverage radius of mm-wave SCS is smaller. Therefore, a significant increase in the network energy consumption will be caused by ultra-dense deployment of mm-wave MBN.Download : Download high-res image (351KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Scenario of mm-wave MBN.
As mentioned earlier, directional beams are simultaneously synthesized at the transceiver for the higher antenna gain in mm-wave communication, while some new challenges will be resulted from the reformation. Firstly, the omnidirectional carrier sensing mechanism used in Wi-Fi will be failed in the mm-wave MBN with directional transmission. As a result, the deafness problem of the third-party node is generated between the communication links, where the QoS demands of the links may be not guaranteed (Shi et al., 2019). Secondly, the number of network concurrent links may be increased due to the reduction of the interference between links. To that end, the network capacity could be enhanced substantially through the increased number of concurrent links under the consideration of the QoS demands. Thirdly, the network energy consumption caused by abundant concurrent transmission is unacceptable due to the ultra dense deployment of mm-wave SCS. As a result, the network energy consumption should be reduced as much as possible when the link transmission requirements are guaranteed. In conclusion, an efficient mechanism of concurrent transmission and power control should be investigated to fully exploit the benefits of spatial reuse and to support green backhaul of mm-wave MBN.
Theoretically, the transmission power consumption can be reduced when more time resources are allocated to transmission link with efficient concurrent scheduling mechanism, where the transmission rate requirement of each link is guaranteed. Specifically, when the transmission time of the link is prolonged double in a large transmission period, the transmission rate of the link is halved with the same achieved throughput. According to the Shannon capacity formula, the transmission power is proportional to 2R/W − 1, where R is the transmission rate of the link and W is the transmission bandwidth of the link. As a result, the transmission power can be reduced as much as more than half with the relatively higher SNR and lower interference. Therefore, the energy consumption will be reduced by half with the same throughput.
In the light of the above-mentioned new challenges and the qualitative analysis in energy consumption reduction for mm-wave MBN applications, comprehensive consideration and enough attention should be focused on the possess of the joint optimization of concurrent scheduling and power control. In this paper, a heuristic and energy-efficient backhaul mechanism (HEBM) is proposed for the green and effective mm-wave MBN, where the spatial multiplexing resulted from concurrent transmissions scheduling are fully exploited for higher energy efficiency and lower energy consumption. Although the state-of-the-arts will be briefly classified and summarized in our paper firstly, comprehensive and systematical overview is not the purpose of our paper. Our innovations and contributions are the following four-fold aspects.
●Firstly, the QoS-oriented joint optimization problem of concurrent scheduling and power control in mm-wave MBN is formulated as an mixed integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) problem, which is a NP-Hard problem and is difficult to obtain an optimal solution in polynomial time. The object of the formulated problem is minimizing the energy consumption of the successfully transmitted flows on the condition of maximizing the number of the scheduled flows as much as possible.●Secondly, a heuristic and energy-efficient backhaul mechanism (HEBM) is proposed for obtaining a suboptimal solution of the formulated problem in polynomial time. The HEBM is composed of two parts, i.e., concurrent scheduling algorithm and power control algorithm. In the first algorithm, the concurrent scheduling set and the time resources allocated to each concurrent scheduling set are decided on the consideration of the QoS demands. In the second algorithm, the transmission power of each scheduled flow is calculated for the reduction of energy consumption.●Thirdly, the basic conditions that the energy consumption can be reduced with the proposed HEBM are analyzed and derived theoretically. Specifically, the influence of interference threshold selection, which is the key parameter used in the construction of the conflict graph, on system performance is also analyzed, and the theoretical derivation is verified by the simulation results.●Finally, extensive simulations have been carried out for 60 GHz mm-wave MBN. The algorithm performance of the proposed HEBM is compared with the existing baseline algorithms, i.e., the TDMA mechanism in Ref. (Niu et al., 2015a), the STDMA mechanism in Ref. (Qiao et al., 2012), and the energy-efficient scheduling algorithm (EESA) in Ref. (Niu et al., 2017a), in terms of the five defined metrics. Great performance superiorities of the HEBM are verified by the simulations and results.
The rest of our paper is organized as follow. The state-of-the-arts are overviewed in section 2. System assumption and model are described in section 3. In section 4, the QoS-oriented joint optimization problem of concurrent scheduling and power control is formulated and investigated, then a heuristic and energy-efficient backhaul mechanism (HEBM) is proposed for obtaining a pragmatic solution in polynomial time. The comparison simulation results between HEBM and the referenced algorithms are analyzed in section 5. Finally, our work is concluded and the future work is pointed out in section 6.
