This paper addresses the issue of accessibility and digital inclusion in Brazil. The study object is the territory of the city of Campo Grande, State of Mato Grosso do Sul, located in the Midwest Region of the country. Campo Grande is the capital and the biggest city of the State, providing diversified services to the population, among which those of technological nature.
For comparison purposes, a specific city of South Korea was also chosen for the research: the city of Busan. It is the second most populated city in South Korea and an important port of the country. Busan is located in the Yeongnam region and is considered to be a center for maritime logistics in Asia. Busan was chosen to be compared with Campo Grande because it is considered one of the most connected cities in the world in terms of internet and digital services, with proposals to become a Smart City by 2023 (Ha, 2018, Seung-woo, 2018).
The objective of this research is, therefore, to present the differences between Brazil and South Korea, at the macro level, and between Campo Grande and Busan, at the micro level, taking into consideration aspects such as accessibility and digital inclusion, guided by Economic and Education performance, and the quality of internet access services offered to the citizens of both cities, one located in South America and the other in Southeast Asia.
Culturally, in developing countries, users usually buy foreign products instead of domestic ones (Karoui and Khemakhem, 2019, Thuy Hang Dao and von der Heidt, 2018). Especially in Brazil, the main e-commerce in Latin America (Thorstensen, Mascarenhas, & de Paola, 2019), most of these products come from China and the United States (ComexVis, 2019). Hence, people take the position of consumers, and not of transformers or creators of technology. The simple fact of making investments in digital transformation technologies would promote an intense exchange of goods and services that would enable economic improvements and the country’s rise in the international competitiveness ranking (OECD, 2018). So, this research seeks to establish a link between accessibility and digital inclusion and political and economic issues, which can raise not only knowledge standards, but, also, economic growth, both a developing country like Brazil could benefit from.
Conducting a search at CAPES’ journals portal on accessibility and digital inclusion in Brazil, between 2006 and 2019, 252 articles were initially found on the subject. When the search is refined to “peer-reviewed journals”, the number of papers decreases to 201. Filtering these articles to Brazil, it results in only 29 papers. Refining it further to two aspects of this research, that is, “information systems” only five papers were found. In this same period, another aspect researched was “telecommunications systems and internet” and only four articles were found. When it comes to “electronic government”, only four papers were found. Hence the relevance of this article and its novelty, since it works with two aspects of the theme in a single approach.Download : Download high-res image (410KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Comparison of competitiveness factors from Brazil and South Korea to period 2017–2018 CNI (2018, p. 48).
This study uses the descriptive–comparative methodology. The data collected was used to describe the services offered in each region. Its selection is called ex post factum because it was made in both national and international consolidated databases known as Big Data.
The work presents data on schools’ access to the internet, as well as the speed and quality of access in both cities. It addresses details related to digital services quality level offered in both cities. The data survey will allow us to understand the main characteristics of both locations, and will make it possible to present the differences found both at the country level, as well as at the local level. After the analysis, suggestions for improvements to the local context of Campo Grande will be offered, regarding internet connectivity and digital inclusion. These matters are fundamental for the designation of the so-called Smart Cities (Anthopoulos, 2017, Caragliu et al., 2009, Giffinger et al., 2007, IO, 2018).
Besides the introduction, this paper is divided into five sections, the first of which presents a comparison between Brazil and South Korea on economic issues, like the Human Development Index and competitiveness. The second deals with Smart Cities, explaining their meaning. The third section is about internet access and the issue of digital inclusion. The fourth presents the results and discussions, and, finally, the authors offer a conclusion.
