The users’ content generation facility of the social web has changed the conventional World Wide Web (WWW) into the social web. The social web platforms have defined new approaches to interact, and the way people used to live. Now, people can easily communicate with each other all over the world and shares their views about all different topics such as politics, education, health, etc. The transmittance of news is the best example that illustrates the rapid exchange of information all around the world. This method has set people free form government or big organizations-based media options such as television channels for spread of news and information at global level in an instant. Technologies like mobiles, tablets, and smartphones are used to create a plethora of data and spread it through the internet every day on blogs, websites and social network services (SNS’s) like Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, etc. These online networks contain information related to personal experiences, opinions, ideas, thoughts, and ideas of people in various modes (Ye, Law, Gu, & Chen, 2011). One can predict the opinions and behaviors based on the opinions and experiences of these people through the content they are posting on these social networks (Figueiredo, Almeida, Gonçalves, & Benevenuto, 2016). As Zhang et al. (2012) are of the view that by collecting the real-time user-generated content related to voting, casting can be used to foresee the election results. The SNS is a platform which uses user-generated data to create relationships and social networks. These networks operate on the Internet and had 2.46 billion users in the whole world in 2017 (Pesonen, 2018). These networks have not only become a part of everyday modern life, but are now an important area of research. They allow researchers on SNS to work on various inquiry topics: the circulation of information in SNS (Scanfeld et al., 2010, Naveed et al., 2011, Weeks et al., 2013), social network structures (Krumm et al., 2008, Kwak et al., 2010, Leskovec et al., 2009), predictions/speculations (Paul and Dredze, 2011, Becker et al., 2010, Figueiredo et al., 2016, Papacharissi et al., 2012) and the influence they have on other resources (Hermida and Thurman, 2008, Ye et al., 2011, Zhang et al., 2012, Papacharissi et al., 2012, Bruns and Burgess, 2012, Lee and Ma, 2012).
The reason behind a hard and hefty research being done in the SNS is due to the importance of the information they can provide. Many of the academic researchers believe that it is important to understand the relation between SNS and news, how they influence each other (Weeks et al., 2013, Lerman and Ghosh, 2010, Lee and Ma, 2012, Nielsen and Schrøder, 2014, Tsagkias et al., 2011) but no one has researched in the characteristics of the contents of each field. Tsagkias, Weerkamp, and De Rijke (2009) state that it is important to study and analyze the characteristics of multiple closely related datasets to understand the hidden informative patterns.
The language of SNS is informal, its grammar is also informal, its keywords are not related to the content, its topic range is private and ranges wide beyond its topic boundaries. This is why it becomes more difficult to encompass any specific event. Text analysis and mining algorithms extract current trends from various text sources which depict the prevailing topics in a particular society. This paper performs trend analysis on the basis of a framework which consists of a number of steps. The first step is a data extraction; it is done by using Twitter streaming API (Application Program Interface). The second step is preprocessing, this step includes data cleaning, data integration, and data reduction. Step three is to calculate Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF), it consists of calculating Term Frequency (TF), calculating Inverse Document Frequency (IDF), and calculating Combined Component Approach (CCA). The fourth and last step is ranking of top topics. This paper analyzes Twitter data by using ranking algorithms. It further extracts helpful and valuable characteristic features of SNS which can also be used in further researches. Overall, the major research contributions of this work are given as follows:
•In order to find the relevant trends, we use TF-IDF and CCA model to find the relevant topics for the most frequently occurred keywords in the collection of tweets.•We use BTM to find the topics in the tweets collection on the basis of different categories. BTM model is ideal for short texts specially tweets as it works on the basis of word co-occurrence patterns and aggregated patterns in the whole corpus for learning topics.•We also analyze the frequent keywords of the trending topics from different perspectives and then discuss their characteristics in detail.•We perform a detailed analysis on how Twitter trends change in a particular period of time using the real-time data. In this regard, we analyzed the data of trending Twitter topics that are changing with continuously with time.
The following paper is organized as: Section 2 discusses the related work. Section 3 presents the Problem statement and Research Contributions. Section 4 discusses Research Methodology while Section 5 discusses the Experimental Setup. Section 6 encompasses the analysis done on the datasets. The paper analyzes the common trends of the SNS data; furthermore, it also explores the efficiency of the ranking algorithm. While Section 6 discusses the Research implications before concluding the paper in the next section.
