With the continuous expansion of industrial manufacturing scale in China, environmental protection is coming into spotlight. Noxious gas and other pollutants, coming from factory productive emission, have had more and more negative effects on air quality. Especially in recent five years, PM2.5 is attracting a lot of attentions and becoming a hot issue for researchers (Mahajan et al., 2018, Zhang and Cao, 2015). As a result, now China is facing a serious PM2.5 pollution problem (Li, Shen, Zeng et al., 2017). Actually, PM2.5 is a sort of ambient particulate, whose aerodynamic equivalent diameter is no greater than 2.5 μm. Since the volume of PM2.5 is very small and its deposition rate is low, it can levitate in air for a long time, which is harmful to human health. Under this circumstance, Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) have established the national acceptable PM2.5 concentration standards to protect environment and public health (Qiu & Li, 2009). Correspondingly, PM2.5 concentrations prediction is an effective way to protect public health by providing an early warning against harmful level of PM2.5 concentrations. Therefore, predicting the concentration of PM2.5 is becoming an important and meaningful task, which is full of many challenges as well.
Originally, classical linear regression model (Li, Shen, Yuan et al., 2017, Li, Shen, Zeng et al., 2017) is used to predict variation trend of PM2.5, which has achieved some success. However, the origin of PM2.5 is very complex. It is particularly related to region, topography, weather, temperature, atmospheric pressure and industrial emission. Since the relationship between these factors and PM2.5 is highly nonlinear, the classical linear regression model fails to satisfy actual demand for high predicting accuracy. In terms of modeling and predicting nonlinear systems, artificial neural network (ANN) has achieved better performances (Bi, Yuan, Zhang et al., 2019, Bi, Yuan and Zhou, 2019, Dau et al., 2019, Gao et al., 2019, Li, Qiao et al., 2016, Principi et al., 2019, Qiao et al., 2018a, Qiao et al., 2018b) and been applied to predict the concentration of PM2.5
 (Deng et al., 2019, Gu et al., 2019, Liu and Chen, 2020, Ong et al., 2016). However, ANN-based models for PM2.5 have many drawbacks leading to an unsatisfactory predicting result. The main reasons are as follows: (1) they are shallow neural networks, which cannot extract effective features from complex data; (2) the shallow neural networks, completely depend on the features of input samples (Qiao et al., 2020). Due to the complex formation condition of PM2.5, the variation trend of PM2.5 cannot be predicted completely by direct samples inputs. Therefore, the accuracy for PM2.5 prediction is affected to some extent. In terms of these challenges, how to accurately predict PM2.5 concentrations is an important task with respect to related researches.
For the sake of overcoming these problems, researchers begin to turn to deep learning with many advantages. Deep learning is an extension of ANN, which is equal to multi-layer perceptron to some extent. Nowadays, deep learning is successfully applied to many fields, such as recognition, computer vision and big data processing (De la Rosa and Yu, 2016, Ronao and Cho, 2016). The idea of deep learning is to achieve hierarchical representation of original data (LeCun et al., 2015), then more abstract features and essential attributions are learned. Most importantly, the deep structure of deep learning networks can extract associated features between input data through the idea of hierarchical representation. Based on the above superiority, deep learning based predicting model has been applied to predict PM2.5 concentrations, and the accuracy is improved to some extent. Deep belief network (DBN) is one of the most feasible deep learning models, and it has been applied in many fields (Hinton et al., 2006, Wang, Qiao, Bi, Jia et al., 2019, Wang, Qiao, Bi, Li et al., 2019). DBN is composed of several restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM), which is stacked sequentially. The learning of DBN consists of two stages: pre-training and fine-tuning (Hinton et al., 2006, Hinton and Salakhutdinov, 2011). The learning style of DBN is beneficial to overcome local minimum resulted from random initialization. DBN-based model can automatically extract those main factors affecting PM2.5 by deeply mining the relations between auxiliary variables.
RBM is a generative stochastic model, which can learn a probability distribution over a set of input data. It is usually used to analyze information processing in dynamical systems. RBM originates from Boltzmann distribution established on the basis of thermodynamic conclusion, which is a probability distribution of particles in a system over all possible states. Most importantly, Boltzmann distribution is available only when the system reaches thermodynamic equilibrium. And temperature parameter is an inherent part of Boltzmann distribution and affects Boltzmann distribution. Hence, temperature is an unavoidable factor of RBM. In Li, Deng et al. (2016), temperature parameter has been introduced into RBM, and has revealed that temperature is an important parameter determining the selectivity of the firing neurons in the hidden layer. However, all of existing DBN models have not yet considered the effect of temperature parameter. Because RBM is a one of basic modules in DBN, the absence of temperature parameter in DBN is just contradicted with the principle of Boltzmann distribution, which may result in a poor performance of DBN in specific tasks, especially PM2.5 concentrations prediction.
In this paper, we propose a temperature-based DBN (TDBN), which takes temperature factor into consideration during the learning process of DBN. The introduction of temperature parameter can improve the learning capability of DBN by changing the transfer functions and activation condition of neurons. Correspondingly, the TDBN model is applied to predict PM2.5 concentration, and the influence of temperature parameter on predicting PM2.5 concentration is discussed by extensive comparison experiments. Most importantly, the structure (numbers of the hidden layers and the hidden neurons) of TDBN is determined by training samples, which is based on a data-driven strategy. This method of determining structure can obtain a compact structure of TDBN. Finally, the experimental results show that TDBN-based model for PM2.5 prediction does improve the accuracy by designing an optimal temperature parameter.
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section 2 gives the data materials for this paper. In Section 3, temperature-based RBM (TRBM) is firstly described, then the modeling methodology of TDBN is presented. Section 4 presents structural design of TDBN for predicting PM2.5. Section 5 gives the experimental results and discussion. Finally, the conclusions is given in Section 6.
