The objective of individual identification is to automatically associate the same person captured by sensor devices at different locations and times. This topic has attracted much attention in recent years for its great potential in visual applications such as anomaly identification and human–computer interaction. It covers a wide range of independent computer vision tasks, such as medical care, face recognition, gait recognition [1], [2] and person re-identification. All these tasks are grounded on Leibniz’s Law which states that if A is strictly identical with B, then A and B have exactly the same properties [3]. The most unique and reliable feature is the face of a person. However, in an uncontrolled environment with non-cooperative subjects, the face will not always be visible. Besides, the face image of low quality and various illumination conditions will undoubtedly increase the difficulty of recognition task [4]. Person re-identification (Re-id) is another hot topic in computer vision, which seeks features of human image that are both robust to intra-personal variations in illumination, view angles and poses. While the color and texture features still play a key role in identification process which is easy to be disguised or concealed [5].
In 1973, Swedish perceptual psychologist, Gunnar Johansson, first discovered that human are sensitive to biological motion [6]. He designed a well known experiment called point-light displays (PLD) which gave a good representation for the biological motion. In PLD test, the color visual information of the body is removed, and only a few motion points corresponding to the body parts and joints of the actor are displayed. He finds that human participants are able to recognize the actions through motion, but unable to recognize actions when the PLD were static. Further research indicates that people are better at identifying PLD of their own gaits compared to others. Beyond that, people are also able to recognize different emotions in PLD. With special attention to body language, an observer can identify anger, sadness, and happiness. People can also identify the actors’ gender with some actions in PLD [7].
Psychological and biological researches have provided strong theoretical support for the recognition tasks from biological motion [6]. Based on human cognitive architecture, many machine learning algorithms have been proposed attempting to automatically recognize behavior patterns or individual identity from biological motion sequences. Although considerable results have been achieved in many researches, most existing approaches are based on a single linear assumption, exploiting the separability of subspace. The main bottleneck for single linear assumption is the limited availability of spatio-temporal data. When dealing with time series data (such as motion sequences), if we simply collapse matrix data into vector, the spatio-temporal structure of data will inevitably destroyed. It is a very intuitive way to extend the single linear model to the bilinear model, while they can only deal with classification problems under a single covariant factor.
In this paper, a novel multi-factor bilinear paradigm is introduced for individual identification that captures the entire spatio-temporal structure of 3D biological motion. The proposed paradigm takes the relationship between different covariate factors and inter-personal discrimination into consideration simultaneously. According to different criteria, we introduce two concrete algorithms for the proposed paradigm. Unlike other methods of using vector quantization to code primitive features, following bilinear methods, the proposed method adopts matrix encodings which allows for more natural spatio-temporal regularization through rank restriction. Firstly, based on the Fisher Discriminant Criterion [8], we propose a novel spatio-temporal multi-factor discriminant analysis (ST-MFDA) for individual identification. The proposed ST-MFDA utilizes a set of paired factor-specific spatio-temporal projections to map samples from different factors into a common discriminant subspace. In the common subspace, samples from the same individual are united and those from different individuals are separated by Fisher discriminant criterion. We prove that the spatio-temporal projections of various factors can be jointly learnt by solving an iterative generalized eigenvalue problem. A schematic illustration of the proposed approaches are shown in Fig. 1. Beyond that, we generalize the bilinear classifier to the case of multiple covariant factors, namely spatio-temporal multi-factor classifier (ST-MFC), to resolve the influence of covariant factors. Similar to the first proposed method, the multi-factor bilinear classifier can map the features from different covariant factors into a common subspace, so that an unbiased classifier can be learned in the common space. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
(1) We propose an effective multi-factor spatio-temporal paradigm for individual identification which is able to capture the entire spatio-temporal structure of the 3D biological motion, and reduce the impact of covariant factors simultaneously.
(2) We propose a novel spatio-temporal multi-factor discriminant analysis, which utilizes a set of paired factor-specific spatio-temporal projections to map samples from different factors into a common discriminant subspace. The discriminability in the subspace is guaranteed by Fisher discriminant criterion.
(3) We generalize the bilinear classifier to the case of multiple covariant factors, and propose spatio-temporal multi-factor classifier (ST-MFC). The ST-MFC can map the features from different factors into a common subspace, and learn an unbiased classifier in the common space.
Download : Download high-res image (536KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Overview the idea of ST-MFDA. Paired spatio-temporal transformations Pv∗, Qv∗ are learnt for each factor v to project motion data into a common subspace where the data from various covariate factors can be well separated. The discriminability of common subspace is guaranteed by maximizing the Fishers criterion, the SW,iv, SB,iv and mv,i denote between-class scatter, the within-class scatter and mean value of ith class in vth factor.
