Internet of Things, that enabled millions of connected devices to store and exchange data for diverse beneficial goals in recent years, has been an important research subject in the field of computing and information technology. Anyhow, nowadays the IoT has widely infiltrated into the many facets of human living everyplace (suchlike home, health-care, etc.). Owing to the huge growth of universe data that produces and collect from IoT environment sensors, the title of big data is basically used to state huge datasets. Generally, data management (or big data management) is considered as one of the main applications for cloud computing systems and requires appropriate tools and methods to process, store and analyze the huge volume of data. In order to process and manage these big data and to support the IoT application requirements, various architectures and solutions are presented (Gubbi et al., 2013; Manogaran et al., 2017, 2018; Suciu et al., 2015; Batool et al., 2017; Pawar and Attar, 2016).
Fog computing is a comparatively new notion and already common idiom that attempts to fulfill the requirements and application of IoT environments. According to the OpenFog Consortium, fog computing is defined as a horizontal architecture for the distribution of storage and data computation tasks near to the users (OpenFog Consortium Archit, 2017). One can define fog computing as a processing and analytical model, which causes cloud resources physically and computationally near to the IoT devices. Actually, the fog layer acts as an interface among the IoT and cloud to help them in data management. Thus, getting the best from any technology, it extends the data management field of the cloud and increases the accessibility of IoT resources. Fog computing acts efficiently to reduce the transmitted data size and therefore, to decrease the service latency, data analyzing in disaster conditions, etc. (Naeem et al., 2019; Bonomi et al., 2012; Sarkar et al., 2015).
In an enormous and real-time IoT data management system, fog Data Management is an important field very required to attain efficient performance (Nikoui et al., 2019). In various researches, fog data management has been examined from diverse prospects. The beginning of appropriate data analysis services and assignment of resources to preprocessing of IoT data have been concentrated for the policy of fog data management (Aazam and Huh, 2014; Datta et al., 2015). Furthermore, little-latency aggregation of the data from distributed IoT devices can be regarded for effective data management as well (Nazmudeen et al., 2016a). In addition, the storage capacity of the IoT end devices is not very rich. In such cases, storage augmentation can be very influential in fog computing to preserve the data of end objects. Therefore, in addition to application administration, storage development in the fog layer for mobile IoT devices has been propounded as an essential portion of data management (Hassan et al., 2015).
There are a number of review papers as well as technical surveys not focused on the fog data management systematically (Nikoui et al., 2019; Mouradian et al., 2017; Kumari et al., 2019; Saheb and Izadi, 2019; Anawar et al., 2018; Gonzalez et al., 2016; Gharaibeh et al., 2017; Bellavista et al., 2019). The main target of the present research was to survey the fog data management domain to comprehend the diversity of topics, main contexts, architectures and tools in fog data management lately offered. The principal topics of fog data management concentrated in the chosen studies included data processing, data storage, and data security. We will offer an SLR method for the fog data management, as well, overview open issues in this field along with related challenges. The major commitments of the present study can be pointed up as follows:
•Outlining a technical taxonomy for classification of the diverse data management topics, main contexts, architectures and tools in fog computing.•Discussing the fundamental challenges in the fog data management field.•Pointing up the upcoming research challenges as well as open issues in the fog data management field.
This review has been organized as follows: Related works will be offered in Part 2. Part 3 will supply a research selection method as well as motivations for the SLR method. The data management research studies in fog computing will be systematically outlined and categorized in Part 4; an appropriate taxonomy and comparison of the topics and main contexts for selected papers will be offered in this part as well. In Part 5, fog data management will be discussed which has not been analyzed comprehensively yet. Eventually, Part 6 will show the conclusion alongside the study limitations.
