Magnetic sensors (also known as magnetometers) in smartphones and tablets are mainly used for orientation and positioning. Unlike cellular, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and NFC hardware, magnetic sensors are not considered communication interfaces. Thus, they can be accessed with basic permissions and remain active even where all wireless communication interfaces are disabled.
This paper demonstrates how attackers can maliciously utilize a smartphone’s magnetic sensors in order to exfiltrate information from isolated, non-networked (air-gapped) computers. In this attack, a malware on the air-gapped computer gathers sensitive data and transmits it via magnetic fields generated from the CPU cores. The covert magnetic signals are then received by a smartphone located in close proximity to the computer. The data received is decoded and sent to the attacker via the Internet (e.g., Wi-Fi or cellular data).
1.1. Air-gap covert channelsAn air-gapped network is a secured computer network in which defense measures are taken to maintain separation from unsecure networks. Air-gapped computers have no network connections (wired or wireless) to the Internet. But despite of these restrictions, incidents in the last decade has shown that air-gapped networks are not immune to malware infections [1], [2], [3]. For example, the Win32/USBStealer Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) has a tool for extracting sensitive information from air-gapped networks [4]. Using such techniques, attackers can breach the network and bypass security measures such anti-virus programs (AV) and intrusion detection and prevention systems (IDS/IPS). In order to exfiltrate data from the compromised air-gapped, networkless, computer, attackers must use air-gap covert channels. Over the years, several types of air-gap covert channels have been proposed based on electromagnetic and electric [5], [6], acoustic [7], [8], [9], optical [10], [11], and thermal [12] emanations from the computer. This paper proposes a magnetic covert channel between air-gapped computers (e.g., workstations) and smartphones located nearby. Note that the covert channel requires that malicious code is run on both sides: on the air-gapped computer and the adjacent smartphone.
1.2. ContributionThis paper introduces a new type of covert communication between air-gapped computers and nearby smartphones. Although the proposed covert channel is limited in terms of distance and speed, it has unique characteristics:(1)Availability. The hardware used for the covert communication exists in virtually all modern computers and smartphones; the CPU used for the transmission is a fundamental component of any computer, and the magnetic sensors used for the reception are an integral part of any modern smartphone or tablet.(2)Required privileges. The malicious codes executed in the computer and smartphone require no special privileges (e.g., root or admin) and can operate from an ordinary user-level process or app.The proposed covert channel even functions in constrained environments where other types of wireless communication are blocked:(1)Faraday shielding. Computers and smartphones in secure areas might be kept in Faraday shielding or a Faraday case to prevent any type of wireless communication to/from the device. Nevertheless, the low frequency magnetic fields used in this covert channel can bypass Faraday shielding.(2)Restricted mode. In some secure zones smartphone might be restricted to a “no-communication” mode. For example, all types of wireless communication interfaces in the device (Wi-Fi, cellular, Bluetooth, etc.) are disabled; however the magnetic sensors in smartphones are not considered communication interfaces, and hence remain active even under such restrictions.The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2 related work is presented. Section 3 provides technical background. Section 4 describes the attack model. The transmission and reception are described in Sections 5 Transmission, 6 Reception. Section 7 presents the analysis and evaluation. Countermeasures are discussed in Section 8, and conclusion are presented in Section 9.
