The fault diagnosis of building refrigeration system is of great significance for the stable operation of the refrigeration system and the reduction of maintenance costs. With the enhancement of refrigeration system informatization, it has become a new research focusing on the understanding of the operation status of various sensors in building refrigeration system and the utilization of data-driven technology to realize the fault detection and diagnosis of the system [[1], [2], [3]].
Machine learning is one of the main methods of data-driven fault diagnosis [4] and many researchers have made fruitful researches on it [[5], [6], [7], [8]]. Some methods are widely used in building chiller fault diagnosis, such as Back Propagation Network (BP) [9], Support Vector Machine (SVM) [10], Bayesian Network [11] and Principle Component Analysis (PCA) [12] et. Shengwei Wang et al. [13] proposed a pattern recognition-based chiller fault detection method using Support Vector Data Description (SVDD). This pattern formulates fault-free data distribution using a hypersphere in a high dimensional space with a tight boundary. H. Han et al. [14] used a least squares support vector machine (LS-SVM) model optimized by cross validation to discuss the effectiveness and efficiency of eight fault indication features extracted from the original 64 parameters. Chen et al. [15] proposed that the subtraction clustering and k-means clustering are combined to identify and classify modeling measurements of unsteady operating conditions. The result shows that the clustering-based statistical model can enhance the ability of dealing with data of multiple operation conditions compared with the traditional PCA model. Zhanwei Wang et al. [11] put forward a novel chiller FDD method based on Bayesian network merged distance rejection and multi-source non-sensor information. The performance of this proposed method is evaluated by using the experimental data from ASHRAE RP-1043. Shubiao Shi et al. [16] use PCA method to reduce the dimension of all characteristic variables, and use a dual neural network model to diagnose the fault of refrigerant charge amount (RCA). This method improves the correct classification ratio (CCR).
However, conventional machine-learning is limited in its ability to process natural data in their raw form. It requires careful engineering and considerable domain expertise to design a feature extractor that transforms the raw data into a suitable internal representation or feature vector from which a classifier could detect or classify patterns in the input [17]. Compared with traditional machine learning methods, deep learning is considered to be a representation learning approach that can directly process and automatically learn mid-level and high-level abstract features acquired from raw data [18]. For example, in the field of image recognition and classification, the raw input is a series of pixels; the first layer of pixels extracts representations of the edges at specific orientations; the second layer of pixels extracts contours by spotting arrangements of edges; the third layer of pixels gathers contours into larger combinations that can match part of the objects; and the fourth layer of pixels may recognize objects based on the combinations of these parts [19]. Deep learning has become the focus of research in many fields. As one of the successful deep learning methods, convolutional neural network (CNN) can automatically complete feature learning without prior knowledge, and has efficient recognition ability. It has been successfully applied in image and video recognition [20,21], medical image analysis [22], image classification [23] and natural language processing [24].
In recent years, CNN is introduced in the field of fault diagnosis. YuantaoYang et al. [25] proposed a fault diagnosis scheme combined of hierarchical symbolic analysis (HSA) and convolutional neural network (CNN), which achieves laborsaving and timesaving preliminary feature extraction and accomplishes automatically feature learning with simplified network architecture. Shisheng Zhong et al. [26] designed a feature mapping method to extract the feature representations for fault dataset by reusing the internal layers of CNN trained on the normal dataset, and SVM is used for fault diagnosis. The method is proved to have good fault diagnosis ability under the condition of small samples by experiments. Jinyang Jiao et al. [27] proposed a multivariate encoder information based on convolutional neural network (MEI-CNN). Three different types of dynamic encoder information are acquired by analyzing and processing the raw position sequence and multivariate encoder information (MEI) data are then constructed by data fusion. After that CNN is used to extract discriminating features and diagnose faults accordingly. These CNN models have achieved good results in fault diagnosis, but are rarely used in the field of building chiller fault diagnosis. Liu Xuting et al. [28] presented a fault diagnosis method for building chillers based on a Sparsely Local Embedding deep convolutional neural Network (SLENet) with an overall diagnosis accuracy of 90.17%. The SLENet model is complex and the accuracy is not so satisfactory.
This study aims to establish a simple and effective FDD model to improve the fault diagnosis performance for building chillers. The major contributions of this study are as follows:
•A novel method of data augmentation, self-production (SP), is proposed so that the diagnosis information is augmented effectively and the fault data is transformed directly into digitized image instead of a traditional picture to avoid unnecessary errors caused by multi-transformation.•A composite model based on SP and a simple yet effective CNN is established for the diagnosis of seven typical faults of a building chiller. The overall diagnosis accuracy attains 98.02%, higher than the CNN model without data self-production, and much higher than the back propagation (BP) network and a complex CNN model in the open literature.•It is found that unlike the application in computer vision, for a chiller fault diagnosis problem, the sequence of the features has a great impact on the model performance. For a better performance, the features should be arranged in certain way.
The rest of this paper is organized as follow: Section 2 is about the methodology that introduces the principle of deep CNN and details the experimental data for a building chiller, the self-production (SP) method and the SP-CNN strategy; Section 3 elaborates the results and discussions about the influence of the structure and SP scale on the diagnosis performance, together with the comparative analysis with two other models (back propagation (BP) network and SLENet); Section 4 investigates the influence of feature sequence on the diagnosis performance and Section 5 presents the conclusion remarks, deficiencies and prospects.
