The Ethiopian or desert hedgehog (Paraechinus aethiopicus) belongs to the mammalian order Insectivora (Lipothyphyla) which is one of the most complicated orders in mammalian taxonomy (Symonds, 2005). This group of animals was once regarded as “waste-basket” as it contains the mammalian species lacking some mammalian characteristics and being insectivores (Butler, 1972; Symonds, 2005). They were reclassified and placed into a separate order (Erinaceomorpha) with two subfamilies (Hutterer, 2005, Bannikova et al., 2014): Erinaceidae (spiny hedgehogs or true hedgehogs) and Galerucinae (hairy hedgehogs; gymnures and moonrats). The Erinaceidae contains five genera and Paraechinus is among them. The desert hedgehog is distributed in Africa from Morocco and Algeria to Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Eretria and Somalia. In the Arabian Peninsula its distribution extends from Yemen, Saudi Arabia through to Jordan, Syria and Iraq (Harrison and Bates, 1991, Kock and Ebenau, 1996). P. aethiopicus is highly adapted to desert and arid environment and they prefer oases and areas with vegetation where food is available.
Only few and scattered reports on the reproduction, parasites and temperature regulation on the desert hedgehog have been published recently (Yamaguchi et al., 2013; Amin and Heckmann, 2016, Amin et al., 2016; Abu Baker et al., 2017, Alagaili et al., 2017, Boyles et al., 2017).
Yamaguchi et al., 2013, Alagaili et al., 2017 studied the reproductive biology of the desert hedgehog and the latter confirmed that it is s seasonal breeder as a result of the progesterone profile in females and the size of the testes in males while the first suggested that free-ranging Ethiopian hedgehogs breed more than twice a year in Qatar based on frequency of courtship behavioural observations. Abu Baker et al. (2017) conducted a research using the GPS to study the effect of land use and sex on the home range size and movement of the Ethiopian hedgehog in Qatar.
Routine health check or screening is generally practiced in many domestic, zoo animals and wildlife in several collections. It involves haematological, biochemical and faecal investigations.
Haematological values play and important role in the determination of the health condition as well as following up any treatment or surgical procedures (Mori et al., 2004, Satue et al., 2009). Haematological profiles from other hedgehog species have been limited to Rossi et al., 2014, Okorie-Kanu et al., 2015. The haematological and biochemical reference intervals for the European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) were established by Rossi et al. (2014). Whereas, Okorie-Kanu et al. (2015) studied the haematological and biochemical profiles of the African hedgehog (Atelerix albiventris) in Nigeria.
There was no study available on the hematological and biochemical reference intervals of the Ethiopian or desert hedgehog. Therefore, the objective of the present study was to establish reference intervals for desert hedgehog following the guidelines published by the American Society of Veterinary Clinical Pathology (ASVCP). Furthermore, the effect of sex and hibernation on the haematological and biochemical variables was also investigated in the desert hedgehog.
