In 1979, Airy wave packet was proved the only non-diffraction solution of the Schrӧdinger equation [1] and in 2007, it was first validated experimentally through a decaying version [2]. The appealing characteristics of AiBs are gradually digging up [3,4], which are widely used in light bullets [5,6], optical particle manipulation [7], surface plasma induction [8] and electron acceleration [9]. Recently, many researchers have explored evolution characteristics of this kind beams in various media, attempting to target more human-controlled beam characteristics. Liwei Jin and his co-authors have reported on the generation of arrays of four Airy vortex beams with normal or deformed structures by employing computer-generated holography [10]. Fedorov et al. outperformed the energy loss rules of annular beam during harmonic generation and proved that its self-focusing characteristic can be preserved or transformed into a multi-ring airy structure [11]. H Deng et al. proposed a ring array core fiber to shape the circular airy beams [12]. In recent researches on optical frontiers, Weng and his colleagues [13] published an extremely novel article about multiple energy oscillations to generate a beam with a ultra-long anti-diffraction distance in free space. The anti-diffraction distance is related to the number of energy oscillations, and an ‘optical pen’ is used to change the number of energy oscillations, amplitude, position and phase. This research surplus a new understand dimension of the properties of light propagation.
In recent years, the main lobe and the side lobe of the AiBs have been deeply demonstrated [14]. BK Sing et al. studied the strengthening of the main lobe energy [15]. Shane Barwick et al. has reported on the way to reduce the side lobe energy of the AiBs [16]. Zhi Li et al. proposed a micro-nano structure that could more accurately regulate the main lobe of AiBs [17]. As is known to all, the AiBs are equipped with the strongest intensity in main lobe and weaker in side lobe [18]. In many application scenarios, we do not hope that the main lobe has strong energy or even none, and simultaneously, the energy between the side lobes with angle of the side lobe, width and intensity of the peak, and the number of strong energy points, can be regulated. In another level, we hope to introduce additional orbital angular momentum (OAM) into the transmission of non-diffused, self-repairing AiBs and combine accurate modulation of side lobe light field. This study is not only of academic value, but also of practical significance.
In this paper, our research mainly includes the beam diffraction theory, the construction of array optical field of at the focus, the synthesis of the airy phase and OAM. Upon Debye diffraction integral theory, we illustrate an amplitude-phase compensation method for energy transformation between the main lobes and the minor lobes of AiBs. The introduction of OAM can efficiently modulate energy distribution of the main lobes. Distortion in modulation can also be well compensated by constructing the incident beam into an array of adjustable ‘sub-focus’. Furthermore, frequency-domain features of the amplitude-phase compensation function are analyzed. Relationship between parameters of compensation function and focusing properties are investigated. This paper provides a multi-dimensional, energy-controlled focusing and transmission pattern of non-diffracted AiBs, which will contribute to "optical communication, optical modulation" and other fields.
