Ensuring a green environment for future generations depends upon the development of alternative sources of clean energy. These energy sources should be cost-effective, emission-free, and less polluting. Recent developments show that hydrogen energy sources would be ideal, having the necessary properties for a variety of domestic and industrial applications [1]. Significantly, hydrogen (H2) is a completely clean-burning, non-toxic fuel which would produce minimal pollution. It has attracted the attention of many researchers seeking to find ways to make large scale utilization cheaper and more efficient. There has already been tremendous progress in the automobile, power production, and aerospace industries [2,3]. Although H2 is known to be an eco-friendly fuel, in its original form, it is hazardous, being highly flammable, which possess unique challenges for production, storage, transportation, and utilization. As it has a wide range of flammability limits (4–75 vol%) in air and low ignition energy (0.02 MJ), any leakage can cause catastrophic damage to the surrounding areas if ignited [4]. For safety and to avoid accidents, it is important to detect even low concentrations of H2 in the atmosphere. The recent maturing of the related technology has paved the way for the development of robust and inexpensive H2 sensors, with high sensitivity, selectivity, scalability reliability, repeatability, and a long life span [5]. Graphene and the transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are interesting two-dimensional layered materials which have proven to have the most stable gas sensing properties at room temperature [6]. However, graphene is a semi-metallic material with zero bandgap, so has certain limitations for such applications. Mono and multilayer TMD nanosheets, with their tunable bandgap (1–2 eV) have thus taken the spotlight in gas sensing applications [7].
Among the many TMD materials, molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) has been widely studied due to its natural availability in the form of molybdenite and its intriguing properties [8]. Specifically, the semiconducting properties of MoS2 monolayers offer the advantages of a direct bandgap of 1.8 eV, high surface to volume ratio, high surface activity, as well as chemical and thermal stability which have led to it being considered as a good replacement of graphene with potential for gas sensing applications [[9], [10], [11]]. However, the sensing capabilities of the MoS2 nanohybrids are considerably lower than that of the nanohybrid graphene-based materials. Ma et al. investigated the effect of the doping of various transition metals (Au, Pd, Pt & Ni) into MoS2 monolayers using first-principle calculations. They showed that metal doping would improve the absorption and sensitivity of the materials towards the gas molecules [12]. Zeng et al. studied the influence of Au doping on the performance of MoS2 monolayer materials for gas sensing and conducted a theoretical analysis of the mechanism. They concluded that the intense gas sensitivity of the Au–MoS2 was better than that of the MoS2 monolayers [13]. Woods carried out a systematic investigation of the effect of the interface between MoS2 materials with different crystal orientations and structures with three different materials (Li, Ag and Ge). They found that the materials invariably formed crystalline bounds for a solid-state chemical transformation [14]. Several other studies have also demonstrated that the addition of MoS2 additives with different transition materials has a huge impact on the morphology, nanostructure, chemical composition, and electronic properties of the materials, which are significant parameters affecting gas sensor enhancement [[15], [16], [17]]. Clearly, the addition of MoS2 is advantageous for the formation of specific nanostructures in various metals and their application for the development of practical gas sensors should be investigated carefully.
In sensor applications, zinc oxide (ZnO) is a promising candidate for the detection of toxic gases, with excellent sensitivity and quick response time. ZnO belongs to the metal oxide semiconductor (MOS) family, having a wide band gap and relatively large excitation band energy [18,19]. The form of the ZnO nanostructures plays an important role in the electron mobility and rapidity of the sensor response. By altering the nanostructure, the gas sensing properties can be improved significantly [20]. In recent times, ZnO nanotubes (ZNTs) have applied for gas sensing applications because of their larger surface area, higher surface oxygen vacancies and higher surface to volume ratio, in comparison to other ZnO nanostructures (i.e., nanowires, nanorods or nanoflakes) [21,22]. However, the ZNTs possess poor selectivity, stability, and operating temperature, which have held back progress in their development for gas sensing applications. Presumably, these weaknesses can be overcome by the use of different nanocomposite materials to produce hybrid nanostructures. A combination of different materials and methods have been used for the fabrication of hybrid nanostructures. It has been proven that the formation of heterojunction interfaces between the hybrid nanocomposites enhances their specific gas sensing capabilities [23]. Many materials science researchers have been attracted to work on various new hybrid structured nanomaterials. Their efforts have dramatically improved the characteristics of gas sensors and filled the gap in understanding the mechanisms and improved their potential applications.
In this regard, combining MoS2 with ZnO nanostructures have shown improved performances when compared to those of pure MoS2 and ZnO nanostructures [[24], [25], [26]]. Although the combination of ZnO–MoS2 has been reported, to-date, no one has reported on the reduction in the wall thickness of ZnO nanotubes using an exfoliated MoS2 solution. Moreover, to the best of our knowledge, no attempt has been made to synthesize dispersed MoS2 into a ZnO nanotube-based H2 gas sensor with the appropriate band models. In this study, we investigate the hybrid structure and the promising hydrogen sensing properties of an MoS2-HIZNT material. The hybrid nanostructure is formed by etching ZNTs in an aqueous solution using MoS2 as the inducing candidate, by means of facile soft chemical synthesis. The processed MoS2-HIZNT material exhibits a unique maze-like structure which results in excellent gas sensing properties for H2 at room temperature. Additionally, a systematic comparison of ZNTs grown with and without MoS2 was carried out and the significance of sensitivity and selectivity towards different gases determined.
