The rapid growth in the human population presents new challenges for the already stretched city services and infrastructure as they are faced with the problems of finding smarter methods to deal with issues including traffic congestion, overconsumption of resources, waste management, and increased energy usage. Technology, particularly the use of ICT in connecting people, political institutions and businesses led to the birth of the Smart city. The typical smart city consists of smart healthcare, smart services, smart electricity and water distribution, smart surveillance, smart infrastructure, smart transportation, and smart buildings. A smart grid (SG) is one of the important components of the smart city. The term grid is used for an electricity system that would support electricity generation, electricity transmission, electricity distribution, and electricity control. SG enables better use of the assets; it provides a long-term sustainable power system, it is aware of all the actions of the users connected to it. Such features enable it to efficiently provide a sustainable supply of electricity with low losses and high levels of quality and security for the safe supply of power. SG technologies also display the potential to reduce carbon emissions. Both SG and smart cities involve the use of advanced electrical engineering, and service technologies, which are both assisted by ICT and additional solutions to efficiently manage complex infrastructure systems. Significant interaction exists between smart grids and smart cities with shared principles, including intelligent interconnectivity, integration, and end-user elements of the smart grid. Smart grids lead to a whole new set of challenges. The two most important challenges faced by the future smart grid are security and privacy. If an appropriate security mechanism is not provided to the SG infrastructure, there are chances that the electricity system may shut down due to security attacks, and the customers will face electricity outages. In modern smart cities, the non-availability of electricity can lead to the collapse of normal life activities like on-line payment systems unavailability, halt of heating systems, and many others. On the privacy end, if customer private data is shared with malicious users, it can put a negative impact on their lives. To provide better security to smart grid infrastructure, a lot of research has been done. In this paper we have studied the secure data aggregation and fault tolerance in SG. One of the salient features of SG is that it supports bidirectional communication to send/receive energy cum data flow to/from the entities, hardware or software, an important feature that was lacking in the traditional grid (Ferrag, Maglaras, Janicke, Jiang, & Shu, 2018). Through this two-way communication, the SG collects and analyzes the real-time status of power generation, transmission, and consumption. Smart meters (SMs) are installed at customer premises, which collect and deliver electricity consumption data and other information about the customers. SG performs various analytics activities on consumption and production data. From this data, SG identifies overall peak-hours usage, load-increase in specific regions, and customer billing, etc. For example, one analysis can be the price-vs-usage case, where the supplier wants to know the impact of the customer’s electricity usage pattern if the prices change for a particular plan. Real-time monitoring improves the overall operations of the SG in terms of demand-and-response, billing, availability and timely response to potential safety and security threats. In contrast to traditional grid systems, SG supports energy awareness, where customers can view their periodic energy usage patterns, monitor their consumption and production, and make a selection among various available electricity generation options. The collection of customer private data and its management also introduces security challenges related to customer privacy (Babar, Tariq, & Jan, 2020). If a customer's fine-grained data is not taken care of with adequate security and privacy mechanisms, it is feared that it would expose customer’s private information, such as living patterns, type of appliances being used and daily activities etc. to attackers who might exploit it. If the customer lifestyle is not healthy, an insurance company can increase its premium fees. From appliances pattern usage, a marketing company can find potential customers for their products. From on/off presence thieves can plan robbery activity. From the home user’s perspective, privacy is of paramount importance. If metering data is submitted in plaintext, malicious users can deduce their daily activities, routine habits and other privacy-related information (Ferrag et al., 2018).
Although cloud-based SG setup is straightforward to deploy, it also introduces problems like reliable connectivity, high latency due to the huge number of packets transmitted from SMs to cloud and latency delays for multiple requests from clients (Varghese & Buyya, 2018), and location traceability (Mustafa, Zhang, Kalogridis, & Fan, 2015). Privacy and communication cost concerns could be reduced to a large extent, if the data aggregation process is employed on the consumption data. There exists work where gateway (GW) is held responsible for aggregating the user’s electricity consumption data and then relaying this information to cloud-based control center (CCC) (Bao & Lu, 2015a). Fog computing, offers extra capabilities compared to cloud computing in terms of latency, location-awareness, geographical distribution, scalability, mobility, heterogeneity, and privacy (Okay & Ozdemir, 2018). There exist work, which utilizes in-network aggregation (Yang & Li, 2013) technique, where an SM is held responsible for sending the data and receiving from the neighboring SMs (acting as a parent node). Each parent node is responsible for computing the aggregate based on the readings received from child nodes (SMs) and its own, and transmits it to its parent on its way to the CCC. The data aggregation is an expensive process considering the limited resources of SMs, both in terms of bandwidth and in terms of computation. To overcome the above issues, Fog-based smart grid architectures have been developed. Which allow reducing the cost associated with the data aggregation process. Fog-based SG architecture, SM layer is responsible for submitting usage data to fog node (FN) at regular intervals. FN is normally used for communicaBertion, and it works as an intermediary node between SM and the CCC. FN has the capability to perform aggregation operations on the smart metering data, and store data locally for a short period of time. As FN is near to end user premises, therefore overall communication for secure data aggregation is efficient. To protect SMs data from malicious users, it is encrypted at SM level and then aggregated at the FN, which forwards aggregated values to CCC. CCC is responsible for decrypting received aggregated values.
The data aggregator process can halt if some of the SMs are malfunctioning and fail to report their consumption data. As a result, the aggregation process cannot be completed without having all the consumption data provided to the aggregator by the SMs. Fault-tolerant data aggregation means that the aggregation activity must not stop and produce the desired results despite some of the SMs not reporting their metering data. Data aggregation activity must support fault tolerance. However, the existing fog-enabled data aggregation schemes for SG (Bao & Lu, 2015a; Lyu et al., 2018; Saleem et al., 2019) have several limitations. The scheme of Lyu et al. (2018), have used a one-time-padding (OTP) to encrypt smart meter data and add noise through Gaussian distribution. The OTP keys are pre-shared between SM and FN. Although OTP is secure but facing some limitations. In OTP, the key size to be of the same size as message text, and previously used keys can’t be reused. This is a severe limitation as a new key will be required during data submission. Sharing a new key between every SM and FN is a daunting task. Furthermore, the scheme also adds delay in the decryption process at the FN level when there are faulty SMS. In the case of faulty SMs, FN has to share a list of faulty SMs with trusted authority (TA). The TA has to verify the status of each failed SM and reply about each SM. It added an extra round of communication to the existing aggregation cycle. In the scheme of Bao and Lu (2015a), all the SMs are divided among clusters. The clusters are assigned to different gateways (GW). During the data collection phase, each SM submits data to its respective cluster head. The cluster head once collected all data, sends it to its respective GW. The GW aggregates data for its related clusters, and submits it to CCC. One of the drawbacks of this scheme is that during the data collection phase keys need to be shared between SM and its cluster head, between cluster head and GW, and between GW and CCC. Moreover, the scheme submits subtly during data submission. If there are faulty SMs and they have not reported their data due to any reason, based on subtly string their data will be ignored. Although it has achieved the purpose of fault tolerance, the decrypted data cannot be used for reporting purposes. In scheme Saleem et al. (2019), in metering data submission time slot fresh keys are required for MAC generations. The schemes also suffer if there are failed meters. TA has to check the status of failed meters and submits their readings. It will slow down the aggregation activity. In the proposed scheme, SM reports consumption data to FN. The FN aggregates data received from all SMs, and, submits it to CCC. During aggregation, if there are failed SMs, the FN picks their last consumption data from already stored buffer data. The benefit of this approach is that no communication with other entities is required for missing SMs data and it also fastens the aggregation activity. Furthermore, this aggregated data can be used for estimation purposes.
1.1. ContributionOur main contributions in this paper can be summarized as follows:1We investigate the problem of fault-tolerance in secure data aggregation in smart grids. A robust, distributed, privacy-preserving Fog-based data aggregation scheme has been proposed, which performs aggregation on smart metering data without invading consumer privacy.2The proposed scheme supports protection against false data injection (FDI) and replays attacks. It ensures the confidentiality and authenticity of customer data. Techniques including modified Boneh-Goh-Nissam (BGN) cryptosystem, homomorphic aggregation scheme, elliptic curve digital signature algorithm (ECDSA) authentication mechanism, are integrated to increase bandwidth utilization, decrease computation cost and save communication overhead.3An efficient fault-tolerance algorithm has been proposed that allow data aggregation activity to continue effectively and efficiently for functional SMs, even in the presence of faulty meters.
1.2. OrganizationThe remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, We firstly discussed the related literature to SG secure data aggregation. In section III, we briefly discussed the preliminaries of the BGN cryptosystem and the ECDSA scheme. In section IV, we discussed the system model and security goals. In section V, the proposed fault-tolerant secure data aggregation scheme is discussed. In section VI, the privacy analysis of the proposed scheme is presented. In section VII, the performance evaluation of the proposed schemes is provided. Finally, in section VIII, the conclusion of this paper is drawn.
