In recent years, Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) have become an important technology for real-world environmental monitoring. The current trend to adopt the standard 6LoWPAN/IPv6 for IP-based sensor networks enables the integration of WSN applications into the Internet of Things (IoT). As a result, the likelihood of multiple WSNs being deployed in the same geographic area is expected to increase even more in the near future. Fig. 1 shows an example of a scenario with multiple sensor networks applications.
A typical WSN is composed of low-power sensing nodes with constrained power supply. Despite its potential as a perpetual energy source, energy harvesting technologies are sensitive to the intermittency inherent in some power sources (e.g. solar, wind or heat). To address this issue, we introduced a negotiation-based cooperation model for the energy harvesting wireless sensor networks (EHWSNs) [1]. Our approach allows each node to adaptively satisfy its load while it agrees to share its harvested energy at some points in time in return for energy at other points in time.
The key goal for the cooperation between EHWSNs is the efficient management of energy to enable the networks’ continuous operation, also known as energy neutrality. Thus, when two or more WSNs are deployed in the same location, this work envisages a long-term cooperation between nodes. Such cooperation starts with energy agreements over a period of time in order to satisfy as much as possible the nodes’ energy consumption profile.Download : Download high-res image (369KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. An IoT ecosystem with multiple co-located WSNs.
Since we are dealing with different networks that have unique characteristics and different owners, the networks can be considered independent and self-interested. Therefore, before cooperation can be decided, networks should be able to exchange offers and find a mutually-acceptable energy flow that maximises their own benefits. Accordingly, our previous work proposed a novel cooperation model based on heuristic negotiation to facilitate Opportunistic Energy Negotiation between neighbouring nodes (OEN).
In OEN, a valid energy flow offer must include the energy values for the predetermined time of cooperation. Since the energy allocated on a given time slot is highly dependent on the amount received or offered in the previous slot due to the battery’s dynamics, the networks bargain over interdependent issues. In the initial phase of our research, decision functions that rely on acceptable ranges of energy amounts were used to compute offers. However, the requirement of valid energy intervals increases as the number of issues in conflict increases. The approach described in this paper is an extension to the case where multiple nodes aim to participate in a negotiation and the process is an improvement of our previous methodology.
Although the cooperation seeks to optimise a system-wide goal, every single node has a limited view about the state of the entire network. This bounded knowledge is either caused by its location or constrained nature. Therefore, to optimise the network operability, the nodes must coordinate their actions with the nodes in close proximity. A multi-agent approach is a natural fit for this setting, where each sensor is controlled by an agent. The agent engages in communication with others in order to achieve system-wide goals in a distributed manner. In the same way, nodes need to adjust to topology changes, varying environmental conditions and multiple negotiation behaviours. To fully support OEN, an agent foresees an insufficient energy allocation scheme and starts the process towards cooperation with a neighbouring network. It first discovers all available agents and selects a negotiation partner from the set of co-located nodes to start a bilateral negotiation. Fig. 2 gives a general overview of our methodology.
In relatively small environments, a self-interested agent can reach its most preferred deal by negotiating with all agents that offer cooperation. The agent then chooses the most suited option to satisfy its negotiation preferences among a set of bargainers. In this situation, an agent supports robust negotiating strategies that result in efficient agreements even in dynamic environments. However, this mechanism may not be reasonable in domains with limited computation or restricted communication bandwidth. In an open dynamic domain, such as WSNs, a negotiation may lead to a communication overhead when coordinated over a large number of agents. Against this background, it is always preferable to start a negotiation which is likely to succeed and reach a better agreement. Therefore, for practical purposes, an agent should be able to anticipate the best potential negotiation partner to maximise its energy allocation.Download : Download high-res image (129KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The 5 phases of the methodology proposed in this work to establish OEN between distinct networks.
To realise this approach, the agent seeking a partner first needs to learn the performance of all the neighbouring agents expected to cooperate. Then, the decision of the negotiation partner involves a trade-off: the negotiation with an opponent provides feedback about its effectiveness (exploration), but the collection of that feedback ignores the immediate benefit of selecting a partner already known as effective (exploitation). Within the partner selection problem, this work focuses on finding an efficient learning method to balance exploration with exploitation. Since agents have to negotiate with incomplete knowledge about their opponents and have no control of the environmental factors affecting the outcomes of the negotiation, it is very difficult to estimate the probability of the payoff structure for the partnership.
Accordingly, we suggest a light-weight learning method to address the problem of partner selection. Specifically, the partner selection can be naturally modelled as a multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem. In MABs, an agent selects from a group of known actions, the one that is most likely to yield the highest reward. The goal of the agent is to maximise the total rewards earned through a sequence of continuous observations. Our interest lies in analysing the performance of MABs algorithms when applied to WSNs. In this setting, the reward corresponds to the negotiation outcome which not only depends on the actions taken by the agent but also on the adversaries behaviour. Given this reward, an agent is able to characterise the performance of the selected opponent to solve the partner selection problem.
Unlike classical stochastic bandits, whereby the rewards are independently drawn following a fixed but unknown distribution, we study the implications of selecting an action in an adversarial setting [2]. The applicability of our solution also depends on the type of adversary. If the adversary chooses the reward ahead of the actual selection process, it is known as an oblivious adversary. Whereas, if the opponent simultaneously chooses the reward with the agent’s choice, an adversary is called a non-oblivious adversary. The second category describes our case.
The contributions of this work are summarised as follows:

•A negotiation-based methodology to enable opportunistic and direct cooperation between co-located networks, where each node is able to reason if cooperation is beneficial in a decentralised manner.•A partner selection technique based on MABs, which satisfies the simplicity and computational efficiency demanded in our domain. In particular, a comparison of four state-of-the-art algorithms is presented.•Experimental evaluation of a generic framework for automated multi-issue negotiation applied in the context of opportunistic energy cooperation.•An energy management method that provides a sensor node with the ability to detect an insufficient energy scheme.•Extensive simulations to capture the energy cost of discovering nearby cooperators. The overhead of the discovery protocol is analysed in terms of the number of agents participating in the process.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 gives an overview of relevant related work. Section 3 provides the system model, energy allocation algorithm and negotiation results using OEN, and defines the problem on partner selection. Section 4 demonstrates how decision-making on partner selection can be done applying MAB algorithms. Section 5 describes our experimental setting and presents the simulation results with the comparison of the MAB algorithms in every scenario. Section 6 details the establishing of OEN and its energy cost. Finally, Section 7 presents concluding remarks along with directions for future research.
