Flip graphs are a powerful tool to study different classes of basic combinatorial objects, such as binary strings, permutations, partitions, triangulations, matchings, spanning trees etc. A flip graph has as vertex set all the combinatorial objects of interest, and an edge between any two objects that differ only by a small local change operation called a flip. It thus equips the underlying objects with a structure that reveals interesting properties about the objects, and that allows one to solve different fundamental algorithmic tasks for them.
A classical example in the geometric context is the flip graph of triangulations, which has as vertices all triangulations of a convex n-gon, and an edge between any two triangulations that differ in removing the diagonal of some quadrilateral formed by two triangles and replacing it by the other diagonal. A problem that has received a lot of attention is to determine the diameter of this flip graph, i.e., how many flips are always sufficient to transform two triangulations into each other. This question was first considered by Sleator, Tarjan, and Thurston [33] in the 1980s, and answered conclusively only recently by Pournin [28]. This problem has also been studied extensively from an algorithmic point of view, with the goal of computing a short flip sequence between two given triangulations [8], [9], [19], [32]. It is a well-known open question whether computing a shortest flip sequence is NP-hard. Interestingly, the problem is known to be hard when the convexity assumption is dropped: Specifically, computing a shortest flip sequence is NP-hard for triangulations of a simple polygon [4] and for general point sets [20].
Another important property of flip graphs is whether they have a Hamilton path or cycle. The reason is that computing such a path corresponds to an algorithm that exhaustively generates the underlying combinatorial objects [17]. It is known that the flip graph of triangulations mentioned before has a Hamilton cycle [16], and that a Hamilton path in this graph can be computed efficiently [21].
Flip graphs also have deep connections to lattices and polytopes [3], [27], [30], [31]. For instance, the aforementioned flip graph of triangulations of a convex n-gon arises as the cover graph of the well-known Tamari lattice, and can be realized as an (n−3)-dimensional polytope in several different ways [7], [18]. Other properties of interest that have been investigated for the flip graph of triangulations are its automorphism group [18], the vertex-connectivity [16], the chromatic number [5], [10], its genus [26], and the eccentricities of vertices [29]. Similar results are known for flip graphs of other geometric configurations, such as matchings, spanning trees, partitions and dissections, etc.; see e.g. [1], [2], [14], [15]. Note that even for a fixed set of geometric objects such as matchings, there may be several natural notions of flips, yielding different flip graphs (cf. [2], [14]).
  In this paper, we consider the flip graph of non-crossing perfect matchings in the plane defined as follows. For any integer n≥2, we consider a set of 2n points placed equidistantly on a unit circle. We let Mn denote the set of all non-crossing straight-line perfect matchings with n edges on this point set. It is well-known that the cardinality of Mn is given by the nth Catalan number Cn=1n+12nn; see [34]. For any matching M∈Mn, consider two matching edges e,f∈M that span an empty quadrilateral, i.e., the convex hull of these two edges does not contain any other edges of M; see Fig. 1. Replacing the two edges e and f by the other two edges of the quadrilateral yields another matching M′∈Mn, and we say that M and M′ differ in a flip. The flip graph Gn has Mn as its vertex set, and an undirected edge between any two matchings that differ in a flip. Fig. 2 shows the graphs G3 and G4. Hernando, Hurtado, and Noy [13] proved that the graph Gn has diameter n−1 and connectivity n−1, is bipartite for all n, has a Hamilton cycle for all even n≥4, and no Hamilton cycle or path for any odd n≥5.Download : Download high-res image (74KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Flips between matchings M and M′ (centered flip), and between M and M′′ (non-centered flip).Download : Download high-res image (228KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Flip graphs G3 (left) and G4 (right). Solid edges correspond to centered flips and are present in the subgraphs H3⊆G3 and H4⊆G4, whereas the dashed edges correspond to non-centered flips and are not present in these subgraphs.Download : Download high-res image (773KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. The graph H6 with the weights of all of its components. Among the components, isomorphic copies are omitted, and the multiplicities are shown above the components. The isomorpic copies differ only by rotation of the matchings. For instance, there are two copies of the component shown at the bottom right.
We now distinguish between two different kinds of flips. A flip is centered if and only if the closed quadrilateral that determines the flip contains the center of the unit circle. For odd n, the circle center may lie on the boundary of the quadrilateral, which still counts as a centered flip. In Fig. 1, the flip between M and M′ is centered, whereas the flip between M and M′′ is not. In all our figures, the circle center is marked with a cross. We let Hn denote the spanning subgraph of Gn obtained by taking all edges that correspond to centered flips, omitting edges that correspond to non-centered flips. Clearly, both graphs Hn and Gn have the same vertex set. In Fig. 2, all solid edges belong to H3 or H4, respectively, whereas dashed edges do not. The graph H6 is shown in Fig. 3.
The main motivation for considering centered flips comes from the study of rainbow cycles in flip graphs, a direction of research that was initiated in a recent paper by Felsner, Kleist, Mütze, and Sering [11]. A rainbow cycle generalizes the well-known concept of a balanced Gray code [6] to geometric flip graphs such as Gn. Balanced Gray codes are useful in applications that require some uniformity of the flip operations (see e.g. [12]), and in the context of the flip graph Gn, this means intuitively that every flip operation occurs equally often along a cycle. To be precise, an r-rainbow cycle in the graph Gn is a cycle with the property that every possible matching edge appears exactly r times in flips along this cycle. Clearly, this means that every edge must also disappear exactly r times in flips along the cycle. In other words, if we assign each of the possible matching edges a distinct color, then we see every color appearing exactly r times along the cycle, hence the name rainbow cycle. For example, the graph G4 has a 1-rainbow cycle of length 8, formed by solid edges in Fig. 2, which all belong to the subgraph H4. In fact, it was proved in [11, Lemma 10] that every r-rainbow cycle in Gn may only contain centered flips, i.e., to search for rainbow cycles in Gn, we may restrict our search to the much sparser subgraph Hn.
Let us address another potential concern right away: Our assumption that the 2n points of the point set are placed equidistantly on a unit circle is not necessary for expressing or proving any of our results. Our results and proofs are indeed robust under moving the 2n points to any configuration in convex position, by suitably replacing all geometric notions by purely combinatorial ones. In particular, centered flips can be defined without reference to the center of the unit circle (see Section 2). Nevertheless, in the rest of the paper we stick to the assumption of an equidistant distribution, to be able to use both geometric and combinatorial arguments, whatever is more convenient.
1.1. Our resultsIn this work we investigate the structure of the graph Hn⊆Gn. In particular, we resolve some of the open questions and conjectures from the aforementioned paper [11] on rainbow cycles in flip graphs. For several graph parameters, we observe an intriguing dichotomy between the cases where n is odd or even, i.e., the graph Hn has an entirely different structure in those two cases. Table 1 contains a summary of our results, together with references to the theorems where they are established.Most importantly, the graph Hn is connected for odd n
 (Theorem 6), but has exponentially many connected components for even n
 (Theorem 9 and Corollary 15); cf.  Fig. 2. For odd n, we show that the diameter of Hn is linear in n
 (Theorem 8). For even n, we provide a fine-grained picture of the component structure of the graph (Theorem 9, Theorem 16, and Corollary 17). We also describe the degrees of vertices in the graph Hn for all n, and we characterize and count the vertices of minimum and maximum degrees (Theorems 3, 4, and 5). Finally, we easily see that the graph Hn does not admit a Hamilton cycle or path for any n≥4. This follows from the non-Hamiltonicity of Gn for odd n≥5 proved in [13], and for even n≥4 this is trivial as the graph Hn has more than one component. Our results also imply the non-existence of certain rainbow cycles in the graph Gn
 (Theorem 22).Table 1. Summary of properties of the graph Hn.Graph propertyodd n≥3even n≥2max. degree (Theorem 4)nn∕2# of maximum degree vertices2?min. degree (Theorem 5)21# of minimum degree verticesn⋅(C(n−3)∕2)2n⋅(C(n−2)∕2)2diameterbetween n−1 and 11n−29
 (Theorem 8)∞# of components1 (Theorem 6)≥Cn∕2+n−3
 (Theorem 9 +
Corollary 15); nn∕2 many vertices form trees of size n∕2+1 each; component sizes bounded by Narayana numbers (Theorem 16 and Corollary 17)r-rainbow cycles (Theorem 22)none for any r≥1none for large rHamilton path/cycle none for n≥4colorability bipartite [13]In all of these results, Catalan numbers and generalized Narayana numbers make their appearance, and in our proofs we encounter several new bijections between different combinatorial objects counted by these numbers.
1.2. Outline of this paperIn Section 2 we discuss some terminology and observations that will be used throughout the paper. In Section 3 we analyze the degrees of the graph Hn. In Section 4 we present the structural results when the number n of matching edges is odd. In Section 5 we discuss the properties of Hn when n is even. Finally, in Section 6 we discuss the implications of our results with regard to the existence of rainbow cycles in Gn. We conclude with some open questions in Section 7.
