Human beings are subject to various drives due to their nature, drives that motivate them to initiate, sustain, or stop their actions, in other words, to modify their behavior. The underlying process that energizes this change is known as motivation (Palmero, 2005, Schunk and Usher, 2012). Motivation begins with the manifestation of a drive and ends with the satisfaction of the same.
Motivation has been studied in various fields, such as psychology (Deci and Ryan, 2012, Dörnyei, 2000, Maslow, 1991), neuroscience (Kaplan, 2007, il Kim, 2013, Kringelbach and Berridge, 2016) and computation (Chame et al., 2019, Krishnan et al., 2016). We reviewed these different approaches to identify and understand the influencing factors which regulate behaviors motivated by needs so that later we could integrate these elements into computer systems that aim to simulate human-like behavior.
Based on Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs (Maslow, 1991), drives represent a need. Physiological needs have a higher priority over others because they assure the organism’s stability, which in turn ensures a proper performance in the individuals activities; they also reflect imbalances of metabolic resources required for correct body functioning. These imbalances’ values oscillate within specific ranges for each person, and to compute them, we use the values of critical physiological parameters in the internal state. This imbalance is conceptualized as physiological homeostasis (Pear, 2012). Hunger belongs to physiological needs and represents an energy deficit, one which motivates food intake: the human body’s primary energy source.
Human regulates hunger through a short-term satiety mechanism that consists of stopping food intake (Bellisle and Blundell, 2013, Cornil, 2017, García-Flores et al., 2017); this is a way to achieve the energy balance required by the body. Besides, note that food intake is not only controlled by a homeostatic aspect, given that hedonic factors, which are associated with subjective experiences of pleasure (Alonso-Alonso et al., 2015, Diniz and Bittencourt, 2017, Farr et al., 2016), are also involved through reward.
Food has intrinsic and extrinsic properties that contribute to short-term satiety, for instance, nutritional content, quantity, taste, color, among others (Amin and Mercer, 2016, Sayegh, 2013). Nevertheless, how these properties influence in homeostatic and hedonic control for short-term satiety is a relevant open research problem, which has hindered the generation of computing systems that can imitate human behaviors arising from hunger. This situation will be addressed in the proposal section.
First, we focus on identifying which homeostatic factors influence the regulation of hunger-motivated behaviors and how. Then, we propose a bioinspired computational model that describes the processes associated with homeostatic factors influencing short-term satiety. This model considers the homeostatic circuit and the reward circuit but, at the moment, does not include hedonic factors. Finally, we bestow a virtual creature with the computational model to determine its capability to modify its behavior (adjust its hunger level) based on the ingested food’s properties, to the point of stopping food intake.
This article is structured as follows: Section 2 presents an analysis of computational systems related to the regulation of food intake-motivated behaviors. Section 3 briefly describes the biological evidence on which this work is grounded. Section 4 presents our proposal considering the biological basis. Section 5 shows the implementation of our system in a virtual creature. Section 6 helps to evaluate our model using a case study. Finally, Section 7 presents our conclusions.
