The World Health Organisation (WHO) defines telemedicine as ‘the practice of medical care using interactive audiovisual and data communications. This includes the delivery of medical care services, diagnosis, consultation, treatment, as well as health education and the transfer of medical data’ (Craig and Patterson, 2005). Telemedicine architecture consists of three tiers, namely, sensor-based (tier 1), gateway-based (tier 2) and medical centre institute (tier 3) (Acampora et al., 2013). The Internet of Things (IoT) conceptualises a connected set of anyone, for anything, at any time, in any place, for any service and for any network (Zaidanet al., 2018). Many definitions of the IoT are available in the literature. According to (Luigi et al., 2010), the rationale behind this multiplicity of meanings is that IoT constitutes two words: ‘Internet’ and ‘Things,’ thereby creating two main visions. The first is oriented for the ‘Internet’ or the component for network, whilst the second is oriented towards the ‘things’ component. ‘Things’ concern the RFID tags, and later, more ‘Things’ appearing as sensors and actuators generally involve mobile devices. Other definitions to understand IoT concepts and characteristics can be found in the works of (Holler et al., 2014; Kortuem et al., 2010; Adibi, 2015). The IoT is capable of boosting various medical applications such as remote health monitoring, fitness programmes, rehabilitation, chronic diseases and elderly care (Adibi, 2015). Compliance with remote monitoring for treatment and medication at home is an important potential for telemedicine application. Therefore, various medical devices, sensors and imaging devices are essential as smart devices or objects constituting a core part of the IoT for the telemedicine architecture (Kortuem et al., 2010). Thus, the future worldwide healthcare industry should be prepared for extensive remote healthcare monitoring through IoT and telemedicine (Talalet al., 2019).
The number of diseases has skyrocketed in the medical field and related areas (DeRubertis et al., 2008). Overall, various diseases have become increasingly frequent, with several varied causes (Wolfe et al., 2007). With the growth of the world population, increased life expectancy and improvement of living standards, additional mortality causes are changing around the globe (Murray and Lopez, 2013). Fig. 1 presents an overview of the global causes of death based on various diseases (Karimkhaniet al., 2017). The chart presents a comparison of people who had died due to special causes in 2016.Download : Download high-res image (451KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Causes of death according to various diseases in 2016 (Karimkhaniet al., 2017).
Globally, majority of fatalities are due to non-communicable diseases (NCDs). These diseases are characterised by being chronic and long-term similar to cardiovascular diseases (CVDs), in addition to others such as diabetes, cancer and respiratory disease. Overall, non-communicable diseases are responsible for more than 70% of global deaths. Additionally, the numbers of patients have been continuously increasing, with an ageing population as the main issue in healthcare services (Seising and Elio, 2013). Fig. 2 presents the National Institutes of Health (NIH)'s total ageing funding between fiscal year (FY) 2013 and FY 2020 (in million US dollars) (Statista, 2019). In fiscal year 2017, neuroscience funding by the NIH was approximately USD 3.57 billion. These figures display the actual ageing funding by the NIH from FY 2013 to FY 2018 and estimates for FY 2019 and FY 2020. According to the National Institute on Aging (NIA), the US recognised and supported continued research in the biomedical domain, particularly research on ageing and Alzheimer's disease and related cognitive diseases (HODES, 2018). Furthermore, anxiety occurs when the number of medical specialists is not increasing at pace with the growing number of patients (JM et al., 2008), consequently presenting challenges in healthcare accessibility and availability.Download : Download high-res image (156KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Total ageing funding by NIH from FY 2013 to FY 2020 (Seising and Elio, 2013).
The abovementioned context raises the question of whether future healthcare is prepared for extensive remote medical care practice through IoT and telemedicine. The results of this systematic review are expected to allow for constructive reflection on future developments and identification of research priorities on IoT-based telemedicine for networks, healthcare services and applications. Some reviews (Gonzalez et al., 2017; Pasluosta et al., 2015; Amendola et al., 2014; Kang et al., 2018; Haghi et al., 2017; Irfan and Ahmad, 2018; Nguyen et al., 2017; Wan et al., 2018) have addressed different telemedicine issues. Although such studies did not provide a systematic review and generalised analysis for similar topics, some design issues are noteworthy in specific cases. To the best of our knowledge, no systematic analysis has been conducted to grasp whether research on IoT and telemedicine exists. Moreover, no discussions exist on major issues and future directions of IoT-based telemedicine architecture to provide suitable healthcare services by covering different human diseases. Accordingly, the current study provides an improved understanding of how IoT characteristics are included in telemedicine practices (the Discussion section presents an argument) to remove all barriers in the way of both in global healthcare. IoT brings new opportunities for telemedicine; therefore, approximately 4 million patients are estimated to vouch for remote health care monitoring by the year 2020 (Milani and Lavie, 2015; Mohammadpour et al., 2017). IoT is targeted to have continuous real-time communicability with the patient, with enhanced interoperability of applications and a detailed case history enabling physicians to adopt judicious treatment procedures (Panesar and Panesar, 2019). This feature would enable improved healthcare delivery through accurate data compilation and automated workflow, substantially reducing the cost and waiting time of patients (Mohammadpour et al., 2017). Availability of real-time data would help in better disease management, providing timely treatment and minimising the chances of error. According to a new report by Global Market Insights, the value of the US telemedicine sector is expected to cross USD 64 billion by 2025 (U.S. 2014-2025, 2019). Increasing the prevalence of chronic diseases is one of the major factors that has created the need to adopt telemedicine services and provide increased home supervision. The telemedicine market is expected to establish a large presence in pre- and post-treatment management and further utilisation of artificial intelligence (Stefanelli, 2001). In IoT-based telemedicine, contexts would find extensive applications where most of the patients can be effectively and remotely monitored, with their critical diseases detected, diagnosed, prevented and treated (Gonzalez et al., 2017). Furthermore, IoT is capable of correctly identifying optimum time supplies for various devices and replenished for their smooth and continuous operation. Furthermore, IoT can efficiently schedule limited resources by ensuring their best utilisation and service for other patients (Talalet al., 2019).
The current study addresses IoT's impact on telemedicine through an extensive literature review. Firstly, this review covers important aspects of IoT in telemedicine, where the latter includes network topology, architecture and platform. The main sensors, devices and communications technology of the IoT wearables are presented. Secondly, the IoT in telemedicine healthcare services is discussed with regard to patients and the elderly, and various figures and statistics are presented. The IoT-based telemedicine application contexts are analysed and defined. The extant literature presents several distribution results, and each is analysed as well. This review shows that the IoT-based telemedicine, which deals with several issues, and the efforts reported in the literature are limited. Most studies have presented duplicate ideas and covered a number of diseases. Following the review, we identified open issues and discussed innovative key solutions to future IoT and telemedicine research that can support healthcare services for different human diseases. In this regard, the current study contributes the following:
1.The classification of current IoT-based telemedicine papers are divided into two categories and form a distinct taxonomy in this trend.2.The human diseases covered by the literature studies are classified into 14 groups and implicitly present a crossover with IoT-based telemedicine taxonomy.3.An IoT-based telemedicine healthcare app context lifecycle and sequencing procedure is mapped.4.Various distribution results and statistics are provided to embrace IoT-compatible telemedicine apps and prototypes, and a useful table is presented, which contains all disease datasets found in the literature.5.Motivations, challenges, recommendations and open issues and key solutions that need attention are provided to ensure that IoT-based telemedicine technologies are robust.
Fig. 3 explains a new conceptual diagram of IoT-based ubiquitous telemedicine solutions based on the scope of the studies presented in this paper.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Conceptual diagram of IoT-based ubiquitous telemedicine solutions.
