Today, distributed data mining and edge-enabled multimedia classification strategies in IoT devices have attracted more attention in medical systems in order for disease diagnosis to be used in online and networked healthcare monitoring systems. The Internet of medical things (IoMT), also known as healthcare IoT, refers to the collection of medical devices and applications that are connected through networks. Many healthcare providers are utilizing IoMT applications to improve treatments, manage diseases, reduce errors, improve patient experience, manage drugs, and lower costs. In this regard, we aim to investigate a high-performance image classification method which can be widely applicable into IoMT nodes. With the rapid development of medical diagnosis, automated human larynx carcinoma (HEp-2) cell classification becomes one of more critical parts in terms of cancer diagnosis. HEp-2 cell is usually utilized as the substrate for Indirect Immuno Fluorescence (IIF) which is commonly regarded to be an effective and comprehensive test for anti-nuclear autoantibodies (ANAs) analysis [1]. IIF bases on image analysis, which is a diagnostic methodology, searches the antibodies in the patient serum to reveal the existence of autoimmune diseases. Caused by its effectiveness, we have witnessed an ever-increasing demand of diagnostic tests for systemic autoimmune diseases. Unfortunately, IIF is still a subjective method that relies heavily on physicians’ experience and expertise, so it will take a lot of time and effort of physicians and delay diagnostic time. In order to overcoming the drawback, some tools and systems had been designed to support the diagnostic procedure. Generally speaking, the staining pattern recognition [2] is very challenging as well as important during IIF diagnostic procedure, since several different patterns may be observed which match with different autoimmune diseases. As the limited ability of human, burdensome task and oversight errors, the need for rapid and accurate medical diagnosis has made automated HEp-2 cell classification mandatory. Although much work [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9] has been done on this task, such as, Liu et al. [3] employed the shape feature for cell classification; Texture and HOG features are utilized in [4]; LBP [6] and CoALBP [9] also are extraction for cell representation; Gao [10] used Deep-CNN algorithm for cell classification.
Nevertheless, these algorithms exist some drawbacks to be solved as follows: (1) These algorithms only extract a kind of features to present cell images, but since the cell often has irregular appearance changes, thus, it is difficult for single feature to perfectly extract image information; (2) The algorithms of multi-feature and multi-model [11], [12], [13], [14], [15] has been explored in many computer vision applications, but the existing algorithms cannot effectively mine the complement relationships between different features.Download : Download high-res image (254KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Pipeline of the proposed CCJGSR method.
In addition, the emergence of IoMT has introduced tremendous changes in promoting disease management, improving disease diagnosis and treatment methods, and reducing healthcare costs and errors. This change has greatly affected the medical quality of patients and all frontline medical staff. However, due to the wide variety of IoMT suppliers and products available on the market and the large number of devices that wireless transmit sensitive medical data to the cloud, IoMT cannot be spared from security and privacy violations. Health care users (e.g., patients, medical staff) lack security awareness, which exacerbates deficiencies and may fuel attacks and endanger the lives of patients. Therefore, ensuring the safety and privacy of IoMT has become an urgent issue and is worthy of further research and solution. Proposing safety methods should be both adequate and reliable.
Taking above analysis into consideration, the paper proposes the method of a multimodal sparse representation based on class consistent and joint group sparse representation for cell image classification, which expresses the test data through the sparse linear combination of training data and constrains the observations from different modalities of the test object to share their sparse statements. At the same time, the objective function embeds both the group regularization terms and class consistent, where they enforce the intuitive constraint which the predicted class labels are consistent across all modalities. The flow chart of entire proposed algorithm is shown in Fig. 1. By observing the experimental results on the HEp2 cell dataset, which was released by the HEp-2 Cells Classification contest held at the ICPR 2012, We can find that our proposed algorithm is superior to existing methods. The following are the contributions of this paper:

•In the paper, joint sparse representation model is proposed to fuse different modality features, where different modality features are reconstructed by corresponding dictionaries, but the sparsity representation coefficients are required to be same for all modalities. Moreover, group sparse representation is also required, which can fully explore the complementary relationships among different modality features.•Class consistent is introduced into the weight scheme, and weights for each modality feature will be updated according to the predictions from different modality features.•Large scale experimental results on HEp-2 Cells Classification contest demonstrate our proposed method is not only effective but also efficient.
The rest of the paper are structured as follows. Section 2, related work is introduced. The class consistent and joint group sparse representation model are given in Section 3. Section 4 shows the experiments and discussion. Finally, Section 5 draws the conclusions.
