Today’s Internet is inundated by data, which makes it more and more difficult for users to quickly locate the data they look for. Recommendation systems are thus developed to facilitate the information search task by recommending pertinent data or resources to users. A class of efficient and personalized recommendation systems are based on collaborative filtering (CF) algorithms, which discover the potential consumption trend of users by mining users’ historical data. Despite the good performance of CF-based recommendation systems, the involvement of users’ historical data in the recommendation process may cause severe information leakage, as demonstrated by the k-nearest neighboring (KNN) attack (Frey, Guerraoui, Kermarrec, & Rault, 2018).
To address the privacy protection issue, Dwork, McSherry, Nissim, and Smith (2006) first proposed the notion of differential privacy (DP). It is well acknowledged that algorithms with DP can deal with background knowledge based attacks such as the differential attack. In view of its strong privacy guarantee, many researchers have recently applied DP to recommendation systems for privacy protection. However, simple applications of DP often lead to poor recommendation performances. As a result, how to balance between privacy protection and recommendation performance becomes the heart of the matter.
Previous user-based CF recommendation systems with DP suffer a great performance degradation due to the achievement of DP (Zhu et al., 2013, Zhu and Sun, 2016). Zhu et al. (2013) found that the mean absolute error (MAE) values of recommendations degraded too much after achieving differential privacy, and used local sensitivities other than global sensitivities to improve the recommendation performance. However, applying local sensitivities weakens the privacy guarantee (Dwork, Roth, et al., 2014). Zhu and Sun (2016) applied the advanced composition theorem to improve the recommendation performance, but their experimental results demonstrated that the recommendation recalls with DP degraded severely compared to the original ones. In practice, this recommendation performance degradation may be unacceptable.
There are probably two main causes for the above performance degradation. First, when applying the exponential mechanism, too many unrelated or weakly related output items are defined for the differentially private recommendations, and these output items may overwhelm the accurate recommendation results due to the randomness of the exponential mechanism. Second, too much “noise” is added to the recommendations due to the composition of many differentially private algorithms. Having confirmed these causes, inspired by Chu, Tsai, Lee, and Pan (2018), we use the k-means clustering algorithm to design a differentially private recommendation system. Also, we reduce the number of applications of the exponential mechanism as much as possible to improve the recommendation performance.
In this paper, we use the k-means clustering algorithm to design a differentially private user-based CF recommendation system. First of all, our system clusters the users of the entire rating matrix M, and adjusts the size of the target category, which contains the target user. Next, it selects a neighbor set from the target category at one time, using the exponential mechanism. Finally, it predicts user ratings and gives top-m items recommendations based on the selected neighbor set.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
(1) We come up with an approach based on the bisecting k-means to adjust the size of the target category, such that the target category is of an appropriate size, and hence both recommendation performance and privacy protection are reasonably balanced.
(2) We design a random neighbor selection to select a neighbor set at one time with only an application of the exponential mechanism instead of multiple ones. This algorithm adds much less noise to the proposed mechanism compared to using multiple instances of the exponential mechanism, and thus improves the recommendation performance.
(3) Based on (1) and (2), we propose a differentially private user-based CF recommendation system based on k-means clustering. Theoretically, we prove that our system satisfies ϵ-differential privacy. Also, we have experimentally shown that our system provides a higher recommendation performance than existing systems.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly review related work. Section 3 introduces some basic concepts and theorems, and describes the privacy issue in collaborative filtering recommendations. We provide the detailed design of our system in Section 4. Section 5 discusses and analyzes our experimental results. Finally, we conclude the paper and make plans for future work in Section 6.
