A group decision-making process consists in a process in which a group of people act collectively in order to select one or more alternatives to solve a certain problem [1]. Today, in large organizations, most decision-making processes (strategic and operational) are carried out in a group. There are several reasons why this is so, such as: it is believed that it is possible to make better decisions in group [2], [3] and the current organizational structure of organizations demand it [4]. When a decision-making process is performed in group, the chance to detect a problem is higher, and subsequently, the decision-makers can work together to find a solution for that problem. This turns group decision-making into a more effective and fast process. To share workloads, to leverage the decision quality, to benefit from the stakeholders’ support or help the less experienced group members are other pertinent reasons that justify making decisions in group [5], [6], [7]. Nevertheless, it is important to create the right conditions so the groups can take advantage of the group decision-making to perform certain tasks, such as generating ideas and solutions through the group interaction [8], [9], [10]. It is argued that members can enhance their ability to learn and stimulate their cognitive level with the group decision-making process [3], [11].
In a world that is increasingly global, it is difficult to bring together decision-makers in the same space at the same time, making it impossible to conduct face-to-face meetings and therefore, many benefits associated to the typical group decision-making process are lost. The Web-based Group Decision Support Systems (GDSS) have been studied since the beginning of the 21st century and they intend to support the group decision-making process anytime and anywhere [12]. They distinguish from conventional GDSS because they operate on the Web, which make them available by simply having an internet connection [13]. However, if the general opinion is that these systems are crucial for the current times, they have been struggling to impose, as is demonstrated by the low acceptance showed by the organizations [12]. The research under this area has been mostly oriented to study models that are capable of proposing solutions according to the decision-makers’ preferences. However, a group decision-making process is much more than just an outcome [14]. In face-to-face meetings, decision-makers communicate (through verbal and nonverbal communication) in order to exchange perspectives, allowing them to reason, to argue, and to create new intelligence [15]. In addition, in face-to-face scenarios there is an implicit process that is respected and in which all the interaction occurs. That means, the process has a time dimension responsible for changing the state of the decision and of all those involved. It is all this interaction that composes the process that makes face-to-face meetings advantageous when compared with individual decision-making [16]. Therefore, a system that does not allow decision-makers to benefit from those advantages, will not be seen as a valuable asset and consequently as something worth to use. Even if just hypothetically, it is capable of proposing the best solution for a certain problem according to the decision-makers’ preferences, but it is not capable of “explaining” the reasons behind that proposal, two things can happen: (1) the system will not be seen as reliable and the proposal can be seen as some kind of guess and (2) this behavior will impede the creation of new intelligence which annihilates all the advantages associated to conventional group decision-making.
In this work, two main contributions are made: the first one is the reflection on the current state of web-based group decision support systems, namely on what its limitations are and the possible impediments to their acceptance by the organizations, focusing on contexts with dispersed decision-makers. The second is the proposal of a conceptual Web-based GDSS especially designed for dispersed group decision-making, with a microservices-based architecture, which aims to address the problems identified in this work. The proposed approach presents a set of essential features we believe can help achieve the success and acceptability of the system. Considering these features, a set of strategies to implement them is also proposed. In addition, some important topics sometimes ignored under the group decision-making context are addressed.
The rest of the paper is organized in the following order: in the next Section, a brief history of Group Decision Support Systems is presented. Section 3 describes the current biggest challenges of GDSS. In Section 4 the Web-based Group Decision Support System conceptual model is presented, mostly in terms of features and architecture. Section 5 presents the discussion. Finally, some conclusions are put forward in Section 6, alongside with suggestions of work to be done hereafter.
