Natural disasters pose significant destructive impacts to society, from damaging buildings, endangering lives to economic loss. For example, earthquake hazards (ground shaking, landslides, liquefaction, surface rupture) can cause damage to buildings and infrastructures because of crumbling the above ground structure and warping the underground foundation [2]. Hurricane and tornado can have detrimental effects on power lines and buildings due to the differential pressures on roofs and walls, and wind-borne debris on windows and building facades. Damages to building envelope also lead to damages to building's interior from rain and storm.
While the occurrence of natural hazards cannot be precisely predicted, their impacts to buildings and infrastructures are fairly well understood. Damages and losses can be minimized with effective management and hazard mitigation planning. Mitigation measures can be identified, prioritized, and implemented through comprehensive risk assessment studies. Buildings represent a major portion of the built environment and are vulnerable to a broad variety of natural hazards. For regional planning, buildings are of major consideration for response planning and disaster management. The first step of regional hazard risk analysis is therefore to acquire the information about the buildings.
Building Information Modeling has been adopted widely by the architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) professionals to efficiently plan, design, construct, and manage buildings and infrastructures. Building Information Modeling is defined as a process that involves the generation and management of “shared digital representation of physical and functional characteristics of any built object [...] which forms a reliable basis for decisions” (ISO 29481-1: 2016). For the building and construction industry, the building information model (BIM) generated represents a valuable source of shareable knowledge and information about a constructed facility to support decision making over the entire life cycle (LC) of the facility, from its conception to demolition (e.g., design, construction, maintenance, risk management, deconstruction, etc.). The information contained in BIM includes building geometry, components, material, etc., which can be adapted to generate computational models suitable for a broad range of computational simulations and applications. BIM can be an ideal source of information for natural hazard risk analyses. For example, based on information captured in the BIM, structural engineers can create models for dynamic simulations of buildings under seismic load conditions. Depending on an application, the level of details (LoD) of the information required can be quite different [13]. In addition to the basic BIM description, information about the usages of a building (e.g., commercial, residential, hospital, etc), its age (e.g., heritage, existing, new) and other conditions can have significant influence on the type of studies that can be conducted. This paper focuses on the building information that are needed for conducting natural hazard risk analysis.
To fully characterize the risk of an urban city affected by natural hazards, analyses need to be performed at multiple scales, from building level analysis to regional-based analysis. Analyses require data about the natural hazard considered as well as data on individual asset, such as buildings. However, in a regional scale, building data, even for some basic building information, such as number of stories, structural type, etc., for all the buildings in a city is scarce and difficult to obtain. Most buildings were designed and constructed before computer digitization was adopted and the concept of building information modeling was conceived. Even when the information is available, the data is often dispersed among different public and private organization. The data is heterogeneous in structure and does not follow specific standard formats. An efficient and low-cost approach that can effectively gather the existing information of buildings in a region and at the city-scale, and capture the LoD required for regional hazard analysis is needed.
Besides extracting data from existing building databases, data can also be acquired by using computer vision technologies to create BIMs for existing buildings. Image-based techniques (such as photogrammetry and videogrammetry), range-based techniques (such as laser scanning) or a combination of both have been employed for large-scale data acquisition. Range-based methods have mainly been focused on capturing the geometry of objects or scenes of interest rather than their semantic information [13]. Comparing to image-based methods, range-based methods have shown better accuracy in acquiring building geometry information, but they require high equipment cost and time consuming data processing and modeling steps [8,19].
Comparing to range-based methods, in addition to lower equipment cost and better processing efficiency, image-based approaches can take advantage of publicly available data sets. For example satellite images are now available for free or can be purchased from commercial vendors at reasonable prices. Street view images, which contain objects like buildings, trees, and cars, are also widely available from map service providers, such as Google Maps, for free or at low cost. Satellite and street view images have attracted attention of engineering researchers and social scientists alike. In particular, street view images have emerged as a popular resource for research not only because of their availability but also the rich visual information captured in the images. Researchers have found the potentials of street view images in many applications. For instance, [20] and [22] use deep learning to screen seismically vulnerable buildings from street view images. The trained classifier is able to capture the visual cues of buildings with significant geometric irregularities. [9] analyzed millions of street view images to predict the perceived safety level of a neighborhood. The visual appearance of an urban environment is used to capture the social surroundings and to derive their implication on the lives of residents. Similarly, the visual cues of cars in street view images have been used to estimate the demographic makeup of neighborhoods [3]. Most image-based studies, including applications in building detection, land usage classification, etc., utilize convolutional neural network (ConvNet or CNN) as the core to extract information from images [5,6].
The functionality of BIM depends on the level of details (LoD) and the technical specifications of the data that can be captured, processed and the model created. For natural hazard risk management at a regional scale, the LoD of a building model does not need to be high. This paper discusses the basic data needs necessary for regional hazard analysis. Creating a regional BIM database that contains sufficient information for hazard risk analyses can greatly enhance the ability to reduce the impact of natural disasters, and to better prepare, respond and recover from an aftermath. This study presents a modular framework for acquiring and integrating the building information from a multitude of sources and developing information models at a regional scale for hazard risk analysis, taking advantage of recent advances in image processing and machine learning.
