Electrocardiogram (ECG) has been widely used in the clinical environment to diagnose heart diseases. It provides information about the patients’ heart electrical activities in the heartbeats. Usually, ECG is collected by electrodes placed on patients’ skin which record the electrical changes during the cardiac cycles, from cardiac muscle depolarization to repolarization. ECG signal mainly includes three consecutive entities: the P wave, QRS complex, and T wave as shown in the sample ECG beat in Fig. 2. The P wave is a summation wave generated by the depolarization front representing atrial depolarization. The QRS complex is usually the central and obvious wave representing ventricular depolarization. According to heart diseases classification method introduced by Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) in 1998 [1], [2], the heartbeats are labeled into four major classes, namely normal (N), supraventricular ectopic beat (SVEB), ventricular ectopic beat (VEB), and fusion (F). Fig. 1 shows the samples of these 4 classes of ECG signals.
With the ubiquity of wearable ECG devices such as the Apple Watch and Xiaomi’s Mi Bunny Smart Watch, the possibility of real-time heart disease detection is now made available. To enable this as an “always-on” feature requires low energy ECG classification. Apart from the ability to distinguish abnormal from normal heartbeats, as found in the Apple Watch, we believe that the ability to do more detailed classification should help with first-aid and medical responses.
In this paper, we propose a spiking neural network (SNN) based energy-efficient method to classify ECG beats for energy-constraint platforms such as wearable devices. To achieve higher energy efficiency, we propose a two-stage convolutional neural network (CNN) workflow with early stopping to reduce the time and energy cost for handling normal ECG beats. As far as we know, ours is the first to use a two-stage CNN/SNN for ECG classifications. We then propose a low-power spiking neural network instead of conventional CNN to further reduce energy consumption.Download : Download high-res image (237KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. ECG signal samples of four classes.
According to both existing works and our experiments, one usually needs two convolutional layers to classify the ECG beats into normal/abnormal classes and three [3] to further distinguish among detailed types such as normal, supraventricular ectopic, ventricular ectopic, fusion, etc. On wearable devices, we would expect that most of the users’ heartbeats are normal. Therefore, we propose the two-stage CNN workflow with early stopping as shown in Fig. 5 to reduce the overhead involved. We first use a two-classes CNN (with two convolutional layers) to detect if the beat is normal. If it is normal, the classification is stopped, otherwise, we then use the four-classes CNN (with three convolutional layers) to further classify the detailed beat types. The detailed analysis of the cost-saving is discussed in Section 3.1.
Spiking neural network is the next-generation neural network where the data transmitted among layers are binary spikes instead of real numbers in CNN. Since multiplications with weights are replaced by additions, energy consumption is significantly reduced, making SNNs suitable for energy-constrained platforms. In our approach, we will first train a CNN, and then convert it to SNN with little accuracy loss. Furthermore, unlike most existing works that use complex preprocessing methods to improve accuracy, including R–R intervals (heartbeat intervals) [4], higher-order statistics(HOS) [5], and wavelets [6], we will simply work on the raw signals to further reduce the energy cost, while achieving a comparable accuracy.
In summary, the contributions of this paper are:Download : Download high-res image (333KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. P wave, QRS complex and T wave of ECG record.

(1)A two-stage CNN workflow with early stopping to reduce the average energy consumption by 33% with an average accuracy of 92%.(2)An SNN for inter-patient ECG classification is derived from the CNN that reduces the power consumption from 10.40 W (on GPU) to 0.077 W using a customized SNN accelerator, with an average accuracy of 91%.
