Location-based services (LBS) have become popular with the spread of smartphones. Moreover, most social network services (SNSs), such as Facebook1  and Instagramm,2  provide LBS to their users. For example, when a picture is taken with a smart phone, the location information is stored as its meta-data. In addition, when users upload content on SNSs, their location information is uploaded in the form of a tag. A location-based social network service (LBSN) is a special SNS focusing on the LBS (Cho et al., 2011). Popular LBSNs, such as Foursquare3  and Gowalla,4  first appeared more than a decade ago, and many researchers have widely utilized their data in various academic fields (Hsieh and Li, 2019, Huang et al., 2020, Kim et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2020).
Although many studies have utilized data from LBSNs, it is still challenging to find a point of interest (POI) of a user due to the difficulty of obtaining POI preference information. Some existing studies have been based on matrix factorization (MF), which is one of the most famous algorithms in the field of recommender system (RS), as well as POI recommendations (Cheng et al., 2012, Gao et al., 2018, Li et al., 2015, Li et al., 2016, Lian et al., 2014). MF has been widely used in studies that focus on solving data sparseness problems, because it allows the incorporation of additional implicit information into the sparse matrix (Hu et al., 2008, Lian et al., 2014). Furthermore, MF can be easily extended by taking into account social information (Ma et al., 2011), such as the relationship between users and the reviews of users in the LBSN (Gao et al., 2018, Li et al., 2016). However, users tend to be active on LBSNs when they are close to home. More than 99% of the check-in information of users originates from their home living area (Scellato et al., 2011, Yin et al., 2013). Therefore, we need a new approach for solving the data sparseness problem utilizing check-in information of the users and its meta-data not social information from LBSNs. Furthermore, a study is needed to recommend POI to users within their main activity area.
To address the issues mentioned above, it is not appropriate to use MF because the most common implicit preference for a POI in LBSNs is the number of visits or the probability distribution for that check-in location. In the case of an RS based on this preference measurement, the accuracy is higher when using algorithms based on a probability distribution such as the latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA) than when using MF (Kotzias et al., 2018). In addition, due to the high generality of the LDA, it can be applied in various research areas and guarantees excellent performance (Jin et al., 2005). Therefore, many studies have suggested methods of analyzing context information (Liu and Xiong, 2013, Xiong et al., 2020, Yin et al., 2013) or geographical information (Yin et al., 2015, Zhu et al., 2018), and applying them as weights to an LDA. Therefore, in this paper, we also use an LDA to propose a POI recommender algorithm with a distance-based weight.
Although many POI recommendation studies based on LDAs have been conducted, there is no study analyzing the importance of the initial check-in by the user (i.e., initial input). In LBSNs, the location of the user’s first check-in is likely to be within his or her living area. Additionally, users are often influenced by their first input during decision making, and this cognitive bias is called the anchoring effect (Sherif et al., 1958). In the research field of decision making, some studies have been conducted based on anchoring effects (Cho et al., 2017, Stettinger et al., 2015), and there are also RS studies that have dealt with this phenomenon (Adomavicius et al., 2011, Wang and Benbasat, 2007). However, few studies have investigated whether this cognitive bias caused by the initial input affects LBSN data. In particular, no study has been conducted to analyze the importance of the user’s initial input in any research area including LBSN. Therefore, we proposed a POI recommendation algorithm using the LDA with the weight of the initial check-in. Furthermore, we analyzed the importance of the initial check-in on LBSNs and the effect of the anchoring effect on POI recommendations.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

•We focused on finding the POI of users within their main activity area by using check-in data and its meta-data in LBSNs. Therefore, we experimented using only specific areas, such as San Francisco, Austin, and New York, from the LBSN dataset.•The main goal of this paper is to propose a POI recommender algorithm applying an LDA that weights the initial check-in of users, and we call this algorithm an anchor-LDA. Also, we analyzed the effect of anchoring effect on POI recommendation through the anchor-LDA.•The effectiveness of the anchor-LDA was verified through comparative experiments utilizing a Gowalla dataset. The experimental results showed that the anchor-LDA outperformed the previous POI recommendation algorithms based on the LDA.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce studies that focused on the anchoring effect and the importance of initial input and reviewed the existing POI RS studies based on MF and LDA. Section 3 describes the anchor-LDA in detail. We explain the comparative evaluation results in Section 4. Section 5 represents the benefits and limitation of our proposed system. Finally, Section 6 concludes this paper and presents future research direction.
