The wearing of the face masks appears as a solution for limiting the spread of COVID-19. In this context, efficient recognition systems are expected for checking that people faces are masked in regulated areas. To perform this task, a large dataset of masked faces is necessary for training deep learning models towards detecting people wearing masks and those not wearing masks. In this sense, some large datasets of face images with virus-related protection mask are available in the literature; e.g. the MAsked FAces dataset (MAFA) Ge et al. (2017), the Real-World Masked Face Dataset (RMFD2) and a masked face recognition dataset Wang et al. (2020) composed of Masked Face Detection Dataset (MFDD), Real-world Masked Face Recognition Dataset (RMFRD) and Simulated Masked Face Recognition Dataset (SMFRD).
Besides, many people are not correctly wearing their masks due to bad practices, bad behaviors or vulnerability of individuals (e.g., children, old people). In this sense, several mask wearing campaigns intend to sensitize people about this problem and good practices Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention - Africa CDC, African Union (2020); Bouteiller (2020); Action Santé-Social Côte d’Ivoire (2020); Colart (2020). In Hammoudi et al. (2020), a mobile application “CheckYourMask” has been designed towards permitting people to check if their mask is correctly worn or not by taking a selfie. The creation of a dataset with correctly/incorrectly worn mask classes has been suggested. In makeml-mask (2020), a dataset composed of images with individual or multiple masked faces (853 images) has been proposed towards creating detection model taking into account the improperly masked faces. In this paper, we propose a relatively large dataset of 137,016 masked face images that is divided into two masked face categories; correctly worn and incorrectly worn (see samples in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b, respectively).Download : Download high-res image (2MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A snapshot of the generated MaskedFace-Net image datasets: Fig. 1a displays samples of correctly masked faces (dataset CMFD); Fig. 1b displays face samples with a mix of incorrectly masked faces (dataset IMFD). For each set, 49 randomly sampled images are presented amongst approximately 70,000 generated images.
Specifically, this work proposes three types of masked face detection dataset; namely, the Correctly Masked Face Dataset (CMFD), the Incorrectly Masked Face Dataset (IMFD) and their combination (MaskedFace-Net) for the masked face detection (see dataset structure in Fig. 3a). Realistic masked face datasets are proposed with a twofold objective: i) to detect people having their faces masked or not masked, ii) to detect faces having their masked correctly worn or incorrectly worn (e.g.; at airport portals or in crowds). To the best of our knowledge, no large dataset of masked faces provides such a granularity of classification towards permitting mask wearing analysis. Moreover, this work globally presents the applied mask-to-face deformable model for permitting the generation of other masked face images, notably with specific masks.
