There have been many methods of 3D indoor scene reconstruction according to various of applications. To reconstruct the semantic structures, the technologies of extracting geometry primitives with certain constraints, such as smartboxes [1], cublids [2], and planes [3], [4], [5], [6], are widely used in the reverse engineering of architecture building models. These methods mainly focus on the autonomous reconstruction of ceilings, floors, walls, and the recognition of doors and windows [2], [5], [7], [8], [9], [10]. Generally, the beams and columns are also important semantic structures of architectural indoor models, and currently there is rarely studies on extracting these structures because it is difficult to recognize them. Firstly, the surface of beams and columns is small compared with that of the ceilings, floors, or walls. The RANSAC-based algorithm [3], [5], which is widely used to extract planes, tends to merge the small planes with the similar properties into one plane. This method greatly reduces the redundancy of planes but cannot distinguish the small planes of beams and columns.
Secondly, there are often missing regions near the beams and columns because of the limitation of the scan device. Fig. 1 shows an example of these cases. This defect data will make it difficult to reconstruct the whole semantic structures of beams or columns. Thirdly, the processing of the sharp edge normals is a tough task with noisy data [11], [12]. As shown in Fig. 2, the normals of the sharp features are terrible deviation when the data contains lots of noisy points, and it is impossible to reconstruct the semantic structures using traditional methods.Download : Download high-res image (1MB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The original point cloud of a building model with missing regions in the beams structures.Download : Download high-res image (467KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. The normals of the sharp edge of beam. The red arrows are the correct directions of the normals, but the green arrows are the extra wrong orientations. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
In modern building models, beams are generally designed to be square, and columns can be square or ‘I’-Shaped, which means we can exploit the beams and columns with orthogonality relationships. Meanwhile, as the Manhattan-world hypothesis indicates, the architectural buildings can be described by an orthogonal coordinate system. Hence, we can use this property to reconstruct these semantic structures. There are two approaches to make use of the orthogonality. One is to calculate the relationship of planes and then conduct the planes selection operations with constraints after extracting planes. Another is to directly utilize Manhattan-world orientation calculating method [13]. However, these two methods cannot be directly applied to recognize the structures of the beams and columns. The first method will miss some important small planes [3], [5], while the second method is inefficient because it calculates all points but only a small part of them are used.
To address this problem, a novel method to extract orthogonal planes from point cloud architecture models is proposed in this paper. Firstly the orthogonal structure is defined, and then it is utilized as a primitive shape to extract the pairwise orthogonal planes in RANSAC framework. Our proposed method can segment small regions of beams and columns, and it can also deal with broken point cloud data. To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
•An orthogonal structure is proposed to represent the semantic beams and columns for point cloud architecture models. This structure is defined as a local frame by two unit orthogonal normals and a point.•An efficient method is developed to extract the pairwise orthogonal planes using RANSAC algorithm.•An approximate method is proposed to deal with broken data of the point cloud, and the non-manifold structure geometry can also be extracted.
