1.1. Microalgal culturing—from unpredictable conditions in natural waters to sophisticated photobioreactorsMicroorganisms are able to populate different biotopes due to their rapid growth rate and ability to adapt to dynamic changes in environmental conditions. Adverse growth conditions induce morphological changes and trigger the biosynthesis of unique chemical compounds that enable survival in harsh developmental conditions. Among the vast number of microorganisms microalgae, an unicellular microorganisms capable of carrying out the process of photosynthesis, form a distinct group of such organisms. As a result, solar energy is transformed into biomass containing numerous valuable products including: fatty acids, lipids, vitamins, carbohydrates, antibiotics, antioxidants, proteins and enzymes. Thus, microalgae are a valuable source of biologically active, high added-value products that are components of healthy food, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics [1]. Moreover, these organisms are widely used to obtain the desired substances due to their relatively low culture costs and fast biomass growth. On the other hand, the optimization of cultivation processes and provision of specific growth conditions to produce the desired metabolites in greater yield require the use of photobioreactors (PBRs), which allow for precise control of temperature, illumination, pH and dosing of nutrients, as well as real-time growth monitoring and quick responses to any changes that induce new requirements for biota growth.
1.2. Artificial systems for the production of microalgal biomassCurrently, two basic types of cultivation systems are used for the production of microalgae on an industrial scale: open systems and closed systems [[2], [3], [4]]. Open systems are the most popular solution used for commercial cultivation of microalgae. Most often, such systems are composed of shallow tank(s) with a specially designed shape ensuring the largest possible area with access to sunlight equipped with mixing and aeration subsystems [5]. The greatest advantage of an open system is its simple design and relatively low construction cost [6], while the most serious drawbacks are uneven light illumination, poor resistance to changes in atmospheric conditions, a low biomass yield, evaporation of water from the tanks during the process and the possibility of contamination of the cultures by other microorganisms (undesirable strains of microalgae, bacteria, and fungi) or viruses [7].Closed systems are usually composed of transparent tank(s), in which environmental parameters such as temperature, pH, illumination, mixing, and dosing of carbon dioxide can be fully controlled. Only a few of the many types of such PBRs can be used for industrial-scale microalgae cultivation. This group consists of tubular PBRs, plastic bag PBRs, airlift column PBRs and airlift PBRs made in the form of flat panels [3]. Tubular systems are characterized by large illumination area whereas; workload and operation costs connected with their disassembly and cleaning are substantially high [8]. Lowering the costs of cultivated microalgae could be achieved by using plastic bag PBRs, nevertheless this solution is accompanied with lower access of light and difficulties with mixing of the cultures. Moreover, the plastic vessels are sensitive to mechanical damage [3]. Column and flat panels airlift PBRs, albeit being characterized by high investment costs, assure good mixing and mass transfer, long lifespan and high ratio of illuminated surface area to volume. On the other hand, rectangular shape of airlift PBRs favors the sedimentation of microorganism and cause substantial problems when cleaning the system [6].
1.3. Photobioreactors—the key to success in culturing demanding biotaIn fact, only closed PBRs can be designed and optimized to provide the best growth conditions for specific strains of microorganisms and thus improve the efficiency of biomass production. Moreover, the amount of biomass is not always the key parameter in the production of specific added-value metabolites. A much more significant factor is the ability to change and precisely control the operational parameters (temperature, illumination intensity and wavelength range, and pH of the medium) of the cultivation process. Light and temperature are the most important here, since they are vital for microalgae growth and biomass production. When optimizing they should be considered together, as it takes place in Nature [9]. Also some compromise has to be reached since it is not possible to supply optimal illumination for all the cultivated cells. This is because outer layers of culture absorb most of the light [10]. One of the most popular light sources are light-emitting diodes (LEDs). This is because they are effective and simultaneously low cost [11].The system of control of operational parameters is especially profitable when specifically mediated physiological stress to the microorganisms induces the production of desired metabolites or increase in metabolite content. Moreover, the use of sensors and control modules in such systems enables the automation of the cultivation process. In comparison to open systems, PBRs require less space, reduce chances of contamination and make culturing independent from environmental conditions [12]. Despite many advantages, these systems are much more expensive, both at the stage of construction (complexity) and during operation, because of the large amount of electric power is needed to provide illumination. Additionally, biofilm formation, which often occurs during cultivation, limits access to light and creates some problems with tank cleaning [13]. However, the high costs associated with the use of closed systems are compensated by the higher homogeneity and productivity of microalgal biomass [14]. For this reason, the use of closed systems on a larger scale is becoming increasingly popular, especially when producing high added-value products, such as: biopharmaceuticals, top-quality cosmetics or components of healthy food [6].
1.4. When it pays off—the value of pure, specific metabolites as fine chemicals: introducing astaxanthin as an exampleAstaxanthin is a carotenoid which belongs to the group of xanthophylls. The molecular structure of this dye provides unique chemical properties and makes it powerful antioxidant among natural compounds. Astaxanthin has found many applications in a variety of industrial branches. Due to its potent health benefits and coloring properties, it has been successfully used as a nutraceutical, food, aquafood and cosmetic additive [[15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]]. These wide applications have generated an increasing demand for astaxanthin-enriched products. This demand is reflected in historical market data in which astaxanthin was sold at a rate of 2500 USD/kg, while the estimated production costs of synthetic astaxanthin were between 1000 and 2000 USD/kg [7,21]. The astaxanthin market has shown steady growth since 2014, reaching a price of over 7000 USD/kg for natural products [[22], [23], [24]]. According to the current Grand View Research Inc. forecast, the global astaxanthin market size is predicted to reach 3.4 billion USD by 2027, expanding at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 16.2% [25]. On the industrial scale, astaxanthin is obtained from both natural sources and through chemical synthesis, with approximately 95% of the market-available astaxanthin being produced by chemical synthesis [26,27]. Due to concerns about food safety and the low bioavailability of chemically produced additives, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has not approved synthetic astaxanthin for human consumption [28]. Only natural astaxanthin is suitable for direct human consumption and can be used in nutraceuticals and products of the pharmaceutical and cosmetics industries [29]. Most of the natural astaxanthin available on the market is obtained from the microalgae Haematococcus pluvialis which seems to be the most promising source of this dye [4,15]. The growing demand for natural food and the high cost of synthesis of this dye has resulted in increased interest in new methods of obtaining natural astaxanthin. Attention is being paid to methods with the potential for industrial use [19,27].Bearing in mind all of the above advantages and challenges of algae cultivation, we decided to design and manufacture a novel airlift modular automated photobioreactor system (AMAPh-S). The report presents the basic unit, designed for construction of modular system of photobioreactors. The novelty of the system lays in technological solutions, which enable its easy operation and clean up. This was achieved by innovative construction of lower distribution cap containing rotary lifted diffuser, which ensures proper introduction of gases into the reactor, fast removal of contents and refilling of vessel, as well as automation of cleaning process [30]. The whole modular system is controlled automatically without using sensors, by applying two-step algorithm of steering and with using optimal profile of LED illumination and optimal dosing of carbon dioxide with possibility of applying three stressor systems. The industrial utility of this system was demonstrated in a case study of the production of astaxanthin at a semitechnical scale using the microalgae H. pluvialis.
