Over the past three decades, a large body of research has focused on automated planning and scheduling for construction. Early efforts focused on using expert systems to automate the process of planning; i.e., creating and sequencing schedule activities given a project scope [1], and scheduling; i.e., time stamping different activities considering best practices and project-specific constraints [2]. Recent efforts have focused on automated construction schedule generation; e.g., [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], computer simulation; e.g., [8], [9], genetic algorithms for schedule optimization; e.g., [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], or an integrated system comprising of two or all of these methods; e.g., [15], [16], [17]. Several recent publications such as [18], [19], [20] offer a comprehensive reviews of these techniques.
While substantial research is conducted, yet the feasibility of scaling these methods to real-world projects is not fully examined. The complexities of actual construction projects on one hand, and the nuances between different construction approaches, on the other, have rendered the manual creation of explicit knowledge representations extremely tedious and, in many cases, entirely infeasible. Hence, most –if not all– construction projects still rely on a single or a small group of experienced practitioners to manually perform their planning and scheduling activities. Current project-specific approaches do not benefit from years of experience accumulated by other planners in similar situations and, in turn, can not guarantee the optimality of generated plans. Given the availability of large-scale historical data, machine learning poses a potential solution to tackle the scalability issue associated with capturing and sharing planning and scheduling knowledge. As such, our hypothesis is to explore if planning and scheduling knowledge and work templates can be modeled using machine learning, with minimal human input.
Activities –the most common basic scheduling units in construction– and their connections form a heterogeneous directed graph; where each node in the graph represents an activity and each edge represents a precedence connection. Nevertheless, the information that describes each schedule activity (i.e., activity descriptions) is unstructured text. Hence, a machine learning technique for modeling planning and sequencing knowledge using previous schedule data, should be able to handle the unstructured nature of the data presented in schedule activity descriptions and the structured data presented by the logical dependencies.
Learning a model from a wide range of schedules developed by different planners requires decoding semantics in activity descriptions. For example, “place concrete level 2” and “concrete placement second floor” refer to the same activity. Similarly, “F/R/P columns - lvl 5” and “concrete columns 5th floor” also refer to the same activity where “F/R/P” is a specific term used in construction scheduling that compresses “framing”, “reinforcing”, and “placing” into one word, and “lvl” is an informal representation of “level”. Hence, formalizing semantics for activity representations that can be generalized to different types of projects is the first step towards the mining of sequencing knowledge and the overall learning task.
In addition to formalizing activity representations, modeling sequencing logic and representing precedence dependencies also requires structured learning. A sequential learning model can learn the distribution of activity successors over a sequence of predecessors allowing for the prediction and inference of the most likely successor activities. And, a similar model can be trained to learn the distribution of predecessors over a sequence of successors allowing for the identification of predecessor activities necessary to complete the work leading to a single or a sequence of future activities.
To address these needs, this paper presents a new machine learning driven method that models construction planning and sequencing knowledge. We build on preliminary results of our earlier work [21] and present a generative sequential Long Short-Term Memory Recurrent Neural Networks (LSTM-RNN) that learns company-specific and project-type specific precedence dependencies, using schedule data from previous projects. Provided with a sequence of schedule activities as an input, the learned model can predict and infer activities that are most likely to appear next. At any point in time during the project execution, our learned model can generate a set of suggested activities for the remaining scope of work. The model can also be used for look-ahead planning purposes. Specifically, for any given activity, our model can predict what activities need to take place as its predecessors by considering the logical constraints associated with the remaining scope of work. Hence, given a list of upcoming activities, our model can predict what predecessors should have been completed by today’s date to “make ready” the future activities. We present a comprehensive set of experiments to validate the presented machine learning method using schedules obtained from real-world construction projects.
The following section provides an overview of the literature. Next, we present our method along with the data and experimental setup used for training and testing. Lastly, the results, benefits, and limitations are discussed in detail.
