Motivated by interference reduction in cellular networks, Kuhn et al. [13] introduced Minimum Membership Set Cover (MMSC) as a combinatorial optimization problem. The input to this problem consists of a set U of elements and a collection S of subsets of U, whose union contains all elements of U. The membership of an element u∈U with respect to a subset S′ of S is the number of sets in S′ that contain u. The goal is to find a subset S′ of S that covers all elements of U and that minimizes the maximum membership of elements in U. The MMSC problem is closely related to the well-studied Minimum Set Cover problem in which the goal is to find a minimum cardinality subset S′ of S that covers all elements of U. By a reduction from the minimum set cover problem, Kuhn et al. [13] showed that the MMSC problem is NP-complete and cannot be approximated, in polynomial time, by a ratio less than ln⁡n unless NP⊂TIME(nO(log⁡log⁡n)), where n:=|U| is the number of elements. They also presented an O(ln⁡n)-approximation algorithm for the MMSC problem by formulating it as a linear program.
Demaine et al. [6] introduced a maximization version of the MMSC problem, in which the input contains an extra parameter β, and the goal is to find a subset S′ of S that covers the maximum number of elements of U such that the membership of every covered element with respect to S′ is at most β. The special case, where β=1, is known as the unique coverage problem. See [6] for a collection of inapproximability results and [14] for the parameterized complexity of the unique coverage problem.
The geometric versions of the above problems, where the elements are points in the plane and the sets are geometric objects in the plane, are also well studied. See [1], [3], [15] (and references therein) for some recent results on the geometric minimum set cover problem and its variants, and see [8], [11], [12], [18] for some recent results on the geometric unique coverage problem.
The geometric MMSC problem attracted considerable attention following the seminal work of Erlebach and van Leeuwen in SODA 2008 [8]. The input to this problem consists of a set P of points and a set S of geometric objects both in the plane. The goal is to find a subset S′ of S such that (i) S′ covers all points of P, i.e., the membership of every point is at least 1, and (ii) S′ minimizes the maximum membership of points of P. They proved that the geometric MMSC problem is NP-hard for unit disks and for axis-aligned unit squares, and does not admit a polynomial-time approximation algorithm with ratio smaller than 2 unless P=NP. For unit squares, they presented a 5-approximation algorithm that takes polynomial time if the optimal objective value (i.e., the maximum membership) is bounded by a constant. To the best of our knowledge, no O(1)-approximation algorithm is known for unit disks.
Download : Download high-res image (52KB)Download : Download full-size image In some applications, e.g. interference reduction in cellular networks, it is desirable to minimize the membership of every point in the plane, not only points of P. Thus we study a version of the geometric MMSC problem in which we want to find a subset S′ of S that covers all points of P and minimizes the maximum membership of all points of the plane (not only points of P). We refer to this version of the problem as minimum ply covering (MPC). The ply [7] of a set S′ is defined to be the maximum membership of points of the plane with respect to S′. With this definition, the MPC problem asks for a subset S′, with minimum ply, that covers P. In the figure to the right, the membership of input points with respect to S′ is at most 2 (see point p), while the ply of S′ is 3 (see the shaded area). (For interpretation of the colors in the figures, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
By a simple modification of the hardness proof of [8], we show (in Section 6) that the MPC problem is NP-hard, for both unit squares and unit disks, and does not admit polynomial-time approximation algorithms with ratio smaller than 2 unless P=NP. We present 2-approximation algorithms for the MPC problem on unit squares and unit disks. Both algorithms run in polynomial time if the optimal objective value (i.e., the minimum ply) is bounded by a constant.
Motivated by channel-assignment in wireless networks, where the use of 3 channels is a standard practice, we study a variant of the MPC problem on unit disks where we want the solution to be 3-colorable, i.e., to be partitioned into three subsets such that the disks in each subset are pairwise disjoint (each subset has ply 1). See [4] for a justification of the importance of 3 channels. We present a polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm for this version as well.
We also revisit the weighted version of the geometric MMSC problem in dimension one, where P and S are points and weighted intervals on the real line, respectively. This problem was previously claimed solved by Nandy, Pandit, and Roy [16], who referred to the problem as “minimum depth covering”. We point out a mistake in their algorithm. We present an O(n+m+M)-time algorithm that solves this problem optimally, where n is the number of points, m is the number of intervals, and M is the number of pairs of overlapping intervals. Our algorithm can be adapted in a simple way to solve the MPC problem on weighted intervals within the same time bound.
1.1. Open problemsThe following questions arise from this work and that of Erlebach and van Leeuwen [8]: (i) Are there polynomial-time O(1)-approximation algorithms for the MPC problem on unit squares or unit disks when the objective value is not necessarily a constant? (ii) Is there a polynomial-time O(1)-approximation algorithm for the MMSC problem on unit disks when the objective value is constant?
