The advantage of the non-monitoring system is that it does not require any training or prior knowledge database. There is also the type of data acquisition; the rest of their behavior and behavioral data were significantly different. By definition Hawkins, the acquisition concept is as follows: 'In doubt, the acquisition is something else to create an observation is so far removed from the other observation.' Obstacle detection technology has become a basic technology in the field of computer security and data analysis. However, similar information security, unauthorised access, seepage, and many other security technologies, and much-undiscovered intervention. Navigation is enabled when the detector needs any information provided and is updated based on complex and extensive projects a navigation effective detection system. The construction of this system depends largely on their preferred method of statistical anomaly detection or their experience. It can be a complete data collection, analysis and storage platform. Pedro Cassava. It can be detected on the network to detect new ship machinery without using any knowledge, business-related information, or training database. I used the method of interference and ship mechanical testing, maintenance, all kinds of worm activity, the internal network-based package of refuse, and has accumulated a discreet source technology to indicate unauthorised network reliability. Based on the functions of the necessary resource of access control, user access control policies can be achieved within an organization. Users cannot decide to grant access to other users. Individual user's role often determines the part of an organization, access control decisions. These include the duties, responsibilities and qualifications. They evaluated three different types of business data block such practices. It indicates that the detection capability of the system, there is no known mechanical detection vessel. War submarine war is becoming increasingly important in the future.
Fig 1 shows, Therefore, underwater weapons and underwater communications network development are very important. War submarine underwater communication network integration, unscrew the underwater vehicle, and the overall sensor buoys, ships, aircraft and other underwater platforms. A communication matched filter for filtering the signal to noise ratio of the signal network penetration. The time interval analysis method is used to obtain a low-frequency feature quantity of abnormal network penetration: adaptive communication spectrum analysis to detect the activation infiltration. The simulation results show high accuracy and strong anti-interference ability, once it a good use of value in practice, and can effectively guarantee security. Wireless networks are typically more vulnerable to ship mechanical detection network numbers, not wireless networks because of their mobility characteristics. Thus, these vessels' mechanical testing, such as a virtual connection space ship machinery detected, has become a significant problem in the network.Download : Download high-res image (230KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Ship Machinery Detection.
It is generally believed that the computer network system security threats from three main areas: marine machinery to detect hackers, computer viruses and ship mechanical testing services. Many tools can make the system threaten several million-do for any system or network of marine, and mechanical testing can be messed up in the short term. Provide a solution called counter operation many similar puzzles protection mechanisms. Ship machinery refuses service to detect an attempt to prevent users from using the machine, temporarily or permanently, by interrupting its service network, such as hacker attacks bomb, doubling the flow, and improve the fragile legal agreements, it is proposed based on an incorrect frame position, to transmit to the server resource release request by sending a specific message. Our move towards deeper space travel, the low-cost path of development of advanced space technology and launching systems are becoming increasingly important to provide a sample site.
The spacecraft status quo requires a scalable were more efficient transmission system. Wireless Sensor Networks (WS) output can increase fuel efficiency and reduce long wires, cables, and connectors' cost and weight. When designing a wireless network, these terminals are formed. Two key factors are relevant to network parameters and the surface. The rocket's recently released landing site has been successfully compared, due to the other sensors' topology other visual data of a lack of space, but not included. The network's performance also allows us to obtain more data with less loss (for example, pockets of conflict). It describes the characteristics of each node in the network. The rocket nozzles are placed in three different configurations. Typically, wireless sensor networks are powered by individual batteries point. Thus, extending the wireless sensor network's life requires further study to reduce significant problems' energy consumption. Researchers have two main methods: the energy balance point of the network; another energy-saving node is increasing. Energy network can prevent off quickly, according to the obtained node information energy balance. Although it is not possible to reduce the contact process in each of the energy consumption of this time, he has frequently aired. The key point is improved by reducing or increasing, such as monitoring the transport mechanism and modifying the received data transmission protocol transmission module, to reduce each terminal's power consumption. Thus, a layer optimization to optimize the entire network cannot be guaranteed. Our proposed design concept: When a node wants to choose a new path, it selects its next hop relay node is closest to its residual power increases the node positions. This solution avoids excessive imbalance power terminals and long transmission path consumption. Thus, the critical tradeoff between the remaining power and the target distance may be seriously considered terminal.
