Due to the filigree nature of technological evolution in recent years, the field of digital forensic expertise is an area in full expansion; and it is not about to stop (Umar et al., 2018; Conlan et al., 2016). The European Commission and other countries outside the EU zone have declared the digital domain as a national priority (CIRNU; Olesen, 2016). In this paper, we will limit ourselves to the field of data extraction from the electronic components that are most often found on crime scenes: mobile phones, micro-SD cards, and IoT devices. However, experts also need to prepare for other type of electronic devices like pacemakers (Lacour et al., 2018; Mauf et al., 2016; Sinha et al., 2016) and bio-sensors. They are already complementary elements in today autopsy.
Software analysis quickly reached its limits with the arrival of native data encryption (Anderson et al., 2006) or when the devices have been damaged or destroyed. Thus, in addition to software attacks, new hardware attacks have been developed (Kocher et al., 1999; Cope and Paczkowski, 2013; Kong et al., 2009; Van der Knijff, 2010) and investigators have had to develop skills in a multiplicity of fields: chemistry, mathematics, physics, computer science and electronics (Heckmann, 2018; Skorobogatov, 1609; Volinsky et al., 2004). They had to think of new approaches, and the purpose of this paper is to show some possible diversions of medical materials and equipment for purposes of extracting data from electronic components.
Finally, one of the major points in the use of medical equipment during data extraction processes is that it allows an increase in skills at low cost, in particular for forensic laboratories not equipped with diagnostic or advanced repair equipment (SEM, FIB, Xprep) which are still expensive.
2. Current similarity between legal autopsy and digital forensic processesThere are many technical similarities between the procedures used by the medical examiner during an autopsy (Gilbert-Barness and Debich-Spicer, 2008), or the examination of a body, and the procedures used by the digital investigator when examining digital evidence that is out of order, damaged, or unknown (Casey, 2009).Acts performed during an autopsy correspond to a standardized procedure (Ludwig, 2002). The autopsy always begins with external observation of the body to look for any wounds. In addition, and before the first surgical act, the medical examiner carries out a complete analysis of the body using a scanner (Fig. 1 (Leth, 2007),) in order to determine the state of the body.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The computed tomography scanner at the institute of forensic medicine, university of southern Denmark (Leth, 2007).This scanner allows the medical examiner to have an indication of invisible internal wounds and allows location of areas of interest (Fig. 2). In the context of a diagnosis of an electronic component, this principle is the same and the investigator will perform 3D X-ray tomography in order to have an indication of the state of damage of the component; this constitutes the diagnostic phase (Fig. 3) (see Fig. 4).Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. X-ray autopsy scanner for body examination.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. X-ray tomography for component examination.Download : Download full-size imageFig. 4. Similarity of scanner used for forensic medicine and it forensics.In the second phase of an autopsy, many samples are taken to analyze in the laboratory. In 1990, Durigon drew up the list of samples to be taken (Durigon, 1990): blood, urine, bile, gastric contents, viscera, brain, lung, hair, nails, and bones. Samples taken from the corpse are then analyzed for traces of toxicological substances, and for histological analyses.By analogy, this process is found at two levels in digital investigation. On a first level, after X-ray diagnostics, the damaged components are physically extracted (desoldering, back-side lapping); this is the beginning of the repair phase, then the re-implantation phase. On a second level, the data that has been physically extracted from the electronic component (memory, or encryption key from the processor or co-processor) are analyzed in the laboratory by specialists in analysis and interpretation, or mathematicians for decryption. The objective is the recovery of the erased data, as well as the interpretation of the data in order to determine the intentionality. But it is the exploitation of the equipment used in legal medicine that interests us in being re-used in data extraction: namely 2D X-ray, 3D X-ray, dental tools and dental paste.We will see at the end of this paper how future advances in electronics will be used in legal medicine. We will see how medical electronics will be, in the years to come, an indispensable complement to the autopsies of tomorrow (pacemaker, bio-sensor).
