Innovations stimulated by the fourth industrial revolution continue to alter products, services and production systems and require professionals who are capable of continuously developing new knowledge, technological trends [1] and skills [2]. This process will drastically impact workers' careers [3] since manual activities and low-skilled jobs will be sharply reduced due to the automation of processes. Therefore, worker education must be adapted with new teaching and learning models that focus on developing interdisciplinary competencies and expanding the capacities of youth to solve problems and confront the challenges presented by the fourth industrial revolution [4]. This adaptation of worker training requires a new model for teaching and learning that focuses on the development of interdisciplinary skills and the expansion of young people's capacities to solve problems and face the challenges presented by the fourth industrial revolution. Meanwhile, technologies can enhance workers' skills, safety and help them execute risky tasks and help companies improve their efficiency and performance by increasing flexibility in production processes, speeding up the launch of new products and services in the market. And in this context, additive manufacturing becomes a facilitator in industry 4.0 [5].
Ananiadou & Claro [6], in their study about the competencies and skills needed in the twenty-first century, addressed the concepts of competency and skill and provided distinctive definitions. 1) Skill is the capacity of the human being to execute tasks and resolve problems. 2) Competency involves the capacity of the human being to meet complex demands, going beyond cognitive elements and functional aspects to include interpersonal attributes and ethical values (including skill, knowledge and attitude). Competency can be supported by intelligence and personality and can provide social value to an individual and economic value to a company. Research shows that human errors affect the reliability of the value chain, have a strong impact on quality and directly affect production due to lost time, increased costs, an increased rate of non-compliant products and a consequent need for rework and/or an increase in waste. These errors may be associated to a lack of knowledge or skills, excessive workloads that cause fatigue or stress, repetitive processes or even to the environments to which workers are exposed [7,8]. Cyber-physical-systems involve dynamic integration between physical processes, software and networks [9]. They are multidisciplinary systems that provide modelling, design and analysis techniques, facilitating the control of processes through an integration between man and machines. In this context, the main area of human influence occurs through their cognitive capacity, predictable behavior and motivation in the intention to predict and minimize human error [8]. Artificial Intelligence is another technology that can assist decision making and the resolution of complex problems using databases built from specialist systems [10,11].
Güller and Büyüközkan [12] present a decision-making model based on Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM), fuzzy logic, Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), and Axiomatic Design (AD) and applied it to a banking sector case study. Sellitto et al. [10] also found that human failure to control the process occurs mainly due to the human inability to discern very small variations in operational conditions. Fuzzy controllers can handle control problems when an accurate model of a process is not available. Sellitto et al. [10] applied them at a cement company and obtained productivity and energy gains. Pasquale et al. [13] systematically evaluated the literature on human reliability analysis in assembly systems. They identified 12 approaches to human reliability assessment that were applied in assembly systems, but there are still several areas that can be explored for further research considering the large quantity and high complexity of variables that affect human error probability. Jirgl, Bradac and Fiedler [8] presented a brief overview of cyber-physical systems (CPS), emphasizing the role of humans in cooperation with CPS. Such systems are often called Human-in-the-Loop CyberPhysical Systems (HiLCPSs). Data obtained via real pilots was used for these purposes and the results indicated that probable human behavior can be predicted based on measurements and modelling.
According to Oztemel & Gursev [14], machinery will not substitute human beings at companies, although they affirm that unemployment will inevitably be caused by technological change. This will encourage professionals to assume new opportunities and responsibilities that prepare them for the future. As a complement, companies will have to adopt new approaches, assisting their professionals to develop skills such as: problem solving, analysis of failure, flexibility for dealing with constant changes and complex new tasks, interconnectivity, innovation, as well as knowledge of technological components and digital transformation [15].
Industry 4.0 presents challenges in the social sphere, requiring companies to develop the highest levels of competencies in their professionals and to attract new talents capable of dealing with the increased complexity of new technologies [[16], [17], [18]]. Moreover, factors such as demographic changes, national regulations, late retirement and increased life expectancy allow people to work later in life, increasing the age range of the work force [19]. For this reason, these authors claim that companies need to develop competencies and skills in employees through training and innovation to remain attentive to the opportunities offered by Industry 4.0 and minimize the impacts caused by disruptive social and economic consequences [4]. However, Benešová & Tupa [20] believe that the transition to sophisticated production will not be immediately possible due to the high financial costs, and a lack of qualified employees capable of working with these technologies.
Although the Reference Architecture Model Industry 4.0 (RAMI 4.0) having been developed by associations in Germany, recent studies show that the literature on Industry 4.0 is not consensual or is not yet defined, in addition there is no standard for the application and use of technologies [21]. These authors show in their study that the most representative technologies for Industry 4.0 are CPS, IoT and big data. The integration of technologies will assist problem solving, facilitate production flexibility and increase efficiency at companies. Motyl et al. [22] consider that nine emerging high-level technologies compose the pillars of Industry 4.0: Big data, autonomous robots, simulation, integrated systems, IoT, cybersecurity, cloud computing, additive manufacturing and augmented reality. For Zhong et al. [23] five technologies are key to intelligent manufacturing: IoT, CPS, cloud computing, big data analytics and information and communication technologies (ICT).
Regardless of which and how many emerging technologies sustain it, the purpose of Industry 4.0 is to analyze large amounts of data to assist decision making, obtain quick responses, make production flexible and efficient, to obtain high quality products and cost reductions, enabling the promotion and growth of productivity and cost savings, and to modify the workforce profile [22,24]. To work effectively with new technologies, companies must rethink the way they address human factors, since collaborators need to develop their skills to maximize the improvements that these technologies can bring to their performance [25].
In this uncertain context, the objective of this study was to identify which competencies the literature considers employees must have to adapt to Industry 4.0, by conducting a systematic review of the literature and a scientific mapping to verify the evolution of the key themes related to the qualification of professionals in Industry 4.0 and possible paths for research and education. The study also sought to discuss current topics and highlight the authors who are specialized in the field to create a map of the field of study. Another object of this study was to identify competencies (knowledge and skills) needed to work with Industry 4.0 as well as journals and keywords to be used in future studies.
