Fibre-reinforced composites are used in applications where high stiffness and low weight are desired. Their main advantages are good mechanical properties (high stiffness and strength), low density, their ease of manufacturing, resistance against corrosion, design flexibility, high fatigue endurance and the possibility of adapting mechanical properties to the requirements [1]. These are some of the reasons why the growth rate of usage of composites is higher than the growth rate of steel or aluminium the last past decades [1].
1.1. Non-crimp fabric reinforced compositesNon-crimp fabrics are used for fibre reinforced composites which in particular have become more and more popular. They were originally developed for applications in aeronautics consisting of 4000–24000 carbon fibres per yarn [2]. The non-crimp fabric composites considered for wind turbines consist of bundles of fibres all oriented in one direction and stitching yarns to ease manufacturing and handling. Because of their good cost to stiffness relation they are nowadays often used for the load carrying parts in wind turbine blades where material cost reduction is essential for further growth of the wind energy industry [3]. The trend in the wind turbine industry is moving towards larger blades since the generated power is proportional to the blade length squared [4]. Due to the high aerodynamic and gravitational forces accompanying these longer blades, a higher stiffness is required. This is mainly achieved with non-crimp fabric reinforced composites, which offer a good performance for the dominating bending loads [5]. In order to improve the key performance of non-crimp fabric composites it is important to understand how the stiffness of the composite depends on the structure at different scales. The structure of the fibres themselves on one scale, the fibre bundles as well as the bundles-matrix interface and the structure on other scales are of interest. Damage can occur on all these scales during cyclic loading. The generated fatigue damage immediately results in reduced stiffness which can be tracked with damage sensing methods in blades e.g. modal analysis [6]. It is vital to understand how these damage mechanisms contribute to this reduced stiffness in order to estimate the fatigue life of the structure.
1.2. X-ray computer tomographyX-ray computer tomography was originally developed in the 1960s and its first application was in the medical field, where it is important to scan as many patients as fast as possible by keeping the radiation dose on them as small as possible. Later in the 1970s and 80s it was also used in non-medical research and industry [7]. In contrast to common radiography, where the entire information of the transmitted object is projected to a detector in one shot, the sample is turned around itself and exposed to the X-ray beam from different angles in order to get many 2D projections (Note: It is also possible to rotate the X-ray source and detector around the sample). By this procedure 3D information about the size and position of an object inside the scanned sample is added. The outcome of the acquisition is a collection of line integrals. The line integrals need to be reconstructed to obtain an image of the scanned object from a finite number of samples [8]. This inverse problem can be approached with two methods, variants of the so called filtered back-projection and iterative algebraic methods [9]. Modern reconstruction algorithms allow for suppression of artefacts [10]. Examples of such artefacts are; incorrect vertical elongation and disappearance of horizontal structures due to for example limited tilting angles for electron tomography [11] or quasi real time reconstruction used for airport security scanners [12].X-ray computer tomography has proven its ability to characterise important material parameters, not only stiffness, strength and fatigue behaviour for polymer matrix composites but also for materials like concrete or metals [13], [14], [15]. The attenuation contrast offered is not as distinct as for glass fibres and matrix, but it can be enhanced by using phase contrast. The need in industry and research for X-ray computer tomography has led to lower prices and improvements in the image acquisition as well as in the following processes (reconstruction and segmentation) due to active research in recent decades.For investigations of fatigue performance it has been a well-documented approach to run a fatigue test and capture the crack propagation by X-ray computer tomography scans [5], [13], [14], [15], [16]. The crack growth can be followed and visualised in 3D and the sample does not have to be destroyed in order to obtain an image of the situation inside the structure. Beside the non-destructive character X-ray computer tomography offers high resolution [17], [18], [19], even though it cannot compete in terms of maximum resolution with scanning electron microscopes. However, for composites often the fibre scale of a few microns is of interest, which is a standard resolution for tomographic scanners. There are two options to correlate X-ray computer tomography data to mechanical testing. One is the so called in situ method, where the sample is scanned during the load application. Wang et al. [20] have reported an in situ four-point-bending test. The challenge for this approach lays in the often limited space available for mechanical testing inside a scanner. Moreover, the time a scan takes can be much longer than the time period, that is of interest, for example an abrupt material failure. More common is the ex-situ method where the sample is under no time dependent loading or no loading at all. Wilhelmsson et al. [21] carried out a compression test on a carbon fibre non-crimp fabric composite specimen and scanned the sample before and after failure. Jespersen et al. [5] and Zangenberg et al. [22] also ran ex-situ tests on glass fibre non-crimp fabric composites, similar to those addressed in the current study. One conclusion of their studies on non-crimp fabric composites under tension fatigue load was a new fatigue scheme that suggests single fibre failures occur already at the first few cycles. The reason for those early fibre cracks were deduced to be stress concentrations that have their origin in the composite’s fibre architecture [5]. One goal of this current study is to create a finite element model based on X-ray computer tomography data that is able to detect these stress concentrations.
1.3. SegmentationSegmentation is often the bottle neck in an X-ray computer tomography aided engineering (XAE) process for fibre reinforced composites. Emerson et al. [18] laid the foundation for fibre tracking for X-ray computer tomography scans and scanning electron microscopy images in Matlab®. A different technology was recently published by Kim et al. [23] where they apply X-ray scattering tensor tomography with circular gratings at continuous carbon fibres embedded in a polymethyl methacrylate matrix. X-ray scattering tensor tomography enables fast detection of fibre orientations in a large field of view compared to classical X-ray computer tomography. Beside continuous fibre composites, short fibre reinforced plastics are also of interest for industry [24], especially in the automotive field. Short fibre composites are used for interior as well as exterior parts with certain stiffness and crash requirements. Usually the fibres are orientated in the flow direction of the injection moulding process which leads to different orientations along the flow or random orientations at the meeting point of flow fronts [25]. Kagias et al. [26] used diffractive small angle X-ray scattering imaging to analyse the fibre orientation of moulded short fibre composites. Tucker together with Advani [27] and Bay [28] used the structure tensor method to predict the fibre orientation for moulding processes for short fibre composites. This method can be also used to analyse image data by determining the eigenvalues of the material orientation. The smallest eigenvalue indicates the fibre direction. Karamov et al. [29] compared the performance of the structure tensor analysis with high-fidelity fibre identification methods (ellipsometry and 3D fibre identification with the commercial software package AvizoTM from Thermo Fisher Scientific [30]) for continuous glass fibre composites. In order to evaluate the performance of the methodologies the sample was scanned with resolutions of 1.4,3.2,8 and 16 μm for a fibre diameter of 17 μm. AvizoTM fibre tracking and ellipsometry were only used for the two highest resolutions, in contrast to the structure tensor analysis which was applied to all resolutions. The authors conclude that all methods deliver accurate results, although the 3D fibre identification from AvizoTM is computationally heavy, which was regarded as major drawback. They also state that the AvizoTM tool only works for high image resolutions which allow for identification of the individual fibres.Huang et al. [31] published an extensive study with their manual segmentation tool on engineering textiles. For their segmentation method they use a software called CompoCT. Despite the described accuracy in the paper, the approach is manual. This creates a labour-intensive process. Furthermore, the accuracy of the analysis results relies on the skills of the operator and number of cross-sections considered. Their study emphasises the achievable accuracy of the method.
1.4. Modelling based on tomography dataThere are two ways to create finite element meshes based on tomography data [32]. One is a direct mesh creation from the data, a so-called voxel based approach [33]. This can be fast for simple geometries and 2D applications. Straumit et al. [34] used the structure tensor analysis for their voxel model. With the information of the fibre orientation a finite element model can be created directly from the image data. The other option to transfer tomography data to finite element models is geometry based. Therefore a surface geometry of the scanned object is created and afterwards a finite element mesh is applied [33].One of the first studies combining computer tomography with finite element analysis was published in 2008 by Badel et al. [35]. They scanned a woven composite in its undeformed and deformed states at the mesoscopic as well as macroscopic scales and validated their simulation model with the X-ray computer tomography scans. Even though this research field has seen huge improvements and they had to deal with limitations in computational power as well as the capabilities of the tomographic scanners, their study provides groundwork for future research. Naouar et al. [36] conducted a similar study on 3D orthogonal non-crimp woven fibres, yet they included a comprehensive segmentation algorithm.Iizuka et al. [37] investigated carbon fibres embedded in an epoxy matrix. The finite element model in their paper was created out of X-ray computer tomography data that was used to track the fibre position and waviness. Their segmentation algorithm produced intersecting fibres which were deleted to avoid numerical issues. In the end, forty-four single fibres and the surrounding epoxy matrix were included in the model. Blinzler et al. [38] on the other hand, developed a finite element model considering thousands of fibres based on X-ray computer tomography data. In this case the single fibre could not be meshed and modelled. Consequently, the model considered the bundle level and the connections between the bundles and the matrix. The creation of a multi-scale model that combines the fibre and fibre bundle scales can be challenging. A study on multi-scale modelling of orthogonal woven composites was recently published by Tao et al. [39]. In their model multiple statistical uncertainties are implemented on different length scales. Consideration of probabilistic multi-scale mechanical properties can lead to more realistic simulations and better designs.Jespersen et al. [40] used a segmentation approach where fibre bundles were segmented manually in different cross-sections. The domains between 2D segmentations were interpolated with the commercial software packages AvizoTM and Geomagic Wrap®. This interpolated data was then applied with a finite element mesh. Three different local coordinate systems were used to reflect different main orientations, but bundle waviness could not be represented.
1.5. ObjectiveTo the authors’ knowledge, to this date no study that proposes a highly automated procedure that combines an automated segmentation method of X-ray computer tomography data for a complex composite lay-up with a multi-scale finite element modelling analysis has been published. Previous studies in literature focus on different specific fields, e.g. fibre tracking or bundle segmentation. In the current study, these fragmented approaches are assessed and combined in one complete and highly automated process. The main objective of this paper is to develop a highly automated process to transfer of X-ray computer tomography data into robust and reliable finite element models of mechanically loaded non-crimp fabric reinforced composites. At the heart of such a process are procedures for automated segmentation of the fibre bundles. The quality of the finite element model will be evaluated for its ability to predict Young’s moduli of unidirectional non-crimp fabric reinforced composites loaded in tension, and for its ability to identify stress concentrations at the position of backing fibre bundles known to initiate fibre fractures under fatigue loading.
