Is bank similar to levee? Are lake and pond more similar than lake and river? While it is natural for human to answer yes to these questions, it is beyond a computer system's comprehension. The human's remarkable cognitive ability to intuitively detect similar patterns in stimuli, which attracts considerable attention in philosophy, psychology and linguistics, is essential to perform key operations in communication. Many cognitive processes hinge crucially on detection of similarity. Notably, Goldstone [1] stated, “assessments of similarity are fundamental to cognition because similarities in the world are revealing”.
Similarity measurement theories stem from psychological studies of human's ability to intuitively determine how conceptually similar two objects are, but not identical, by providing a quantitative value [2]. Semantically similar concepts are related by synonymy, hyponymy, and hypernymy, all of which involve an is-a relation (e.g. the car is a transportation tool), while semantically related concepts are connected by any kind of relations [3].
In order to reduce semantic ambiguity, enable semantic interoperability between distributed information systems or web resources and improve the quality of retrieval tasks, computer scientists use concepts’ features or interrelations in a hierarchical structure to develop computational measures of semantic similarity. Semantic similarity measurement has been an important topic in several research areas for more than 10 years [4] and plays a pivotal role in word-sense disambiguation (e.g. interpreting bank as the terrain alongside the bed of a river or as a financial institution), natural language processing, information retrieval, information integration, and data maintenance.
In geographic information science (GIScience), geospatial information consists of geometric and the matic data. Although some computational models for semantic similarity measurement has been proposed in literature, they overlook spatial distribution characteristics or geometric features and pay little attention to the types and ranges of properties. Feature catalogues often provide a textual description of a feature type and state-of-the-art geographic information systems use mainly syntactic similarity measures, which have performed powerfully with textual information, but cannot resolve ambiguities or fail to build connections to related or similar geospatial items that a data provider did not foresee [5]. Particularly, GIS users with diverse backgrounds have no precise definitions underlie the matter of discourse. Therefore, users need not only geospatial domain ontologies that formally represent geospatial knowledge and specify conceptualization of geospatial entities to interpret the meaning of the used terms, but also computational methods that go beyond syntax comparisons to address complex geospatial semantic issues. In GIScience field, the theoretical and practical importance of geo-semantic similarity has been fully acknowledged, resulting in a growing body of research [6], [7], [8]. When comparing different geospatial concepts, human will associate to entities with typical geometric features in mind unconsciously, such as a broad area of water body, a banded road, a near-circular pond, a near-rectangle building or a rectangle swimming pool. The geometric features of these geospatial entities are quite different and distinctive. Hence, the geo-semantic similarity measure should reflect the effect of spatial cognition which is overlooked by the existing measures. In contrast to the work done by psychologists and computer scientists, the similarity models in GIScience should pay more attention to geospatial features such as shape, size, spatial distribution, and spatial relation.
This paper makes new contributes to geo-semantic similarity studies in the following ways. Firstly, we describe a comprehensive structured knowledge representation to define concepts in an ontological property space framework with more explicit constraints and interrelations. Secondly, we discuss in detail the calculation of contribution for each ontological property that describes geospatial concepts. Thirdly, we account for the categorization information of cognitive process via the effect of the relative position in the ontology hierarchy structure. Fourthly, the geometric feature similarity of entities is computed to improve accuracy of the results. Finally, based on the aforementioned methods, a novel hybrid approach that processes semantics of geospatial data in a cognitively plausible way is proposed to capture geo-semantic similarity more effectively.
