Many biometric modalities have been used successfully to provide reliable authentication of individuals in a large number of scenarios. However, they have always encountered three majors challenges: the presence of spoofing attacks, the required massive data (particularly for biometrics based on video), and the high cost of the device for iris, fingerprint and gait processing [1]. Recently, a number of studies have shown that the bioelectrical signals of the brain (EEG), muscles (EMG), and heart (ECG) are unique for each human being (i.e., they show universality, uniqueness and liveness detection) [2], [3]. Among all these hidden human activities, ECG-based recognition has gained a lot of interest lately, which made the argument of using it as an alternative person-discriminative biometric due to its continuous accessibility, friendly privacy, considering the fact that it is relatively difficult to falsify compared to existing methods used for human identification.
Despite recent advances in ECG based biometrics, the ECG based feature extraction approaches currently available can be divided into two main categories: fiducial point and non-fiducial point methods [4], [5]. A fiducial approach aims to extract explicitly the temporal, amplitude and morphological information from the ECG signal are mostly referred to by P, Q, R, S, and T waves [6], [7]. Each set of these points composes a single heartbeat, and each can be used to represent the modality of human being in biometric context. The performance of such methods strongly depends on accurate fiducial detection methods. On the other hand, many sources of variability surround the ECG signal measurement, most of them are Artifacts, heart rate change, ageing and clinical conditions. This process is often cost-intensive and time-consuming and consequently may lead to an increase in the overall complexity of the biometric system. Compared to a fiducial points approach, the non-fiducial approach does not use the fiducial point of the heartbeat ECG, and instead, it uses the implicitly features extracted from the whole waveform ECG such as: autocorrelation, DCT coefficient, wavelet and compression coefficients [6], [8], [9], [10]. But, the major issue with these approaches is that they can be computationally expensive, considering the fact that they strongly depend on the accuracy of the ECG signal window selection, and that can compromise the performances of the overall biometric system.
To date, all existing biometric systems are still challenged to meet the consensus of yielding both the benefits coming from identification systems based either on fiducial or non-fiducial features. In order to address the above-mentioned issues, opted for a statistical approach that can extract the discriminating features from an ECG segment with partial fiducial point detection, which allow us to overcome the aforementioned issues (i.e., the detection of all the fiducial points, for an appropriate window size of the ECG signal) associated both fiducial and non-fiducial techniques. Few researches have addressed ECG based-biometric systems based on statistical features [11], [12], [13]. In this work, we utilize a popular method, called local binary pattern generally applicable to image processing, and adapt it to the ECG signal as a feature extraction method. Similar to basic 2D-LBP, the 1D-LBP is a very efficient operator and is promising as it has the ability to extract the dominant features from ECG without requiring some particular reference points (i.e., R peak points) located in heartbeat segment. Indeed, we show that generated features from a 1D-LDP descriptor have achieved high accuracy for ECG recognition. The rest of this paper is organized as follows; Section 2 reviews the state of art of biometric techniques based on biosignals and the related research work. Section 3 explains the proposed method to enhanced the conventional one-dimensional local binary pattern. In Section 4, we discuss the experimental setup and results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the work.
