The single-stranded RNA virus SARS-COV-2 is the causative agent of the COVID-19 disease that impacts the lower respiratory tract, with the potential to spread and injure other tissues [1]. Since the first step in SARS-CoV-2 infection is the binding to host cell receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) [2,3], it has been a focus of interest to identify the pattern of expression of this receptor across different cells and tissues. To the date, we know that there is a variety of host cells expressing it in different tissues, such as lung AT2, nasal epithelial cells, tongue keratinocytes, liver cholangiocyte, colon colonocytes, esophagus keratinocytes, ileum and rectum enterochromaffin cells, stomach epithelial cells, and kidney proximal tubules [[4], [5], [6]]. Accordingly, there is a broad set of symptoms that ranges from asymptomatic infections, mild respiratory symptoms, severe pneumonia, acute kidney injury [7], digestive and circulatory system affection, to fatality [1].
It is becoming common knowledge that the surface-anchored spike protein mediates coronavirus entry through the binding to ACE2, however, it less explored that it has also been reported that coronaviruses exploit many other surface molecules according to the cell type in order to make the internalization more efficient [8]. Surface virus-host triggers a subsequent series of biological events including the formation of vesicles, enzymes activation/repression, host molecules recruitment, synthesis of viral components, among others. Integrated multi-omics studies offer an unbiased approach to study the host-virus interactomics that ultimately can result in the detection of therapeutic marks for this novel infection, which has a pivotal role in drug repurposing as well as developing new drugs and vaccines in a precise and efficient manner [9]. Consequently, arousing omics-scale studies on this viral infection are offering a great potential to study the pathobiology of the infection, and ways forward for diagnostic and therapeutic innovation [9].
Since SARS-CoV-2 is highly contagious, this oftentimes restricts the provisions for clinical samples handling in omics research facilities, making it a challenge to implement systems-level molecular studies. Given this limitation, it would be useful for scientists in this field to be aware of trends in omics approaches and computational methods to address COVID-19 related issues. Hence, in this bibliometric analysis and mini-review, we aimed to describe how computational methods or omics approaches were used during the first months of the COVID-19 pandemic. We hope that our work will serve as a roadmap to allow the identification of key knowledge gaps and research priorities. Furthermore, we hope that in future pandemics or infectious outbreaks, this document may be useful in helping future researchers quickly understand how omics data and computational methods can be used to help discern the first unknowns that arise in these scenarios.
