The ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) is a sequential Monte Carlo method for parameter and state estimation in highly non-linear models [1], [2], [3]. In this context, an ensemble of model realizations is employed to estimate the moments of the background error distribution and to obtain samples from posterior distributions via the assimilation of observations. Since ensemble members come at high computational costs, ensemble sizes are bounded by the hundreds, while model resolutions are by the millions [4]. Consequently, the ensemble covariance is rank-deficient, and therefore, sampling errors can impact the quality of analysis corrections. For instance, sampling errors detonate spurious correlations among distant model components. Typically, localization methods can be performed to dissipate such correlations. In this context, well-known methods are covariance matrix localization, observation localization, and spatial domain localization. Another possible choice is the use of shrinkage covariance matrix estimators wherein the ensemble covariance matrix is replaced by a full-rank (and well-conditioned) estimator, which exploits the error correlations brought by the forecast ensemble and our prior knowledge about the structure of background error correlations. The resulting estimator possesses a special structure that can be exploited to obtain efficient EnKF implementations, for instance, by using the Rao–Blackwell Ledoit and Wolf (RBLW) estimator [5], the matrix-free formulation EnKF-RBLW is obtained. The RBLW relies on Gaussian assumptions on prior errors; this assumption can be relaxed using distribution-free estimators such as the Ledoit and Wolf (LW) one [6]. In this manner, besides no enforcing Gaussian assumptions on the underlying distribution of forecast errors, the impact of spurious correlations can be mitigated.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses preliminary concepts with regard to data assimilation, shrinkage covariance matrix estimation, and ensemble-based methods are discussed as well. Section 3 develops an efficient implementation of the EnKF based on the Ledoit and Wolf estimator. Experimental tests are performed in Section 4 by using an Atmospheric General Circulation Model. Lastly, conclusions are stated in Section 5.
