As an indispensable part of modern society, the chemical industry has brought great convenience in daily lives and significant benefits in the global economy. However, the risk and incidence of chemical accidents are also increasing (Wood and Fabbri, 2019). Over the past decades, the global chemical industry has been looking for methods to balance productivity and safety at work (Behie et al., 2020; Gao et al., 2020). Lately, with the increasing emphasis on safety production and raising awareness of safety issues, resolving this dilemma in the chemical industry has become a core issue related to the development of chemical and petrochemical enterprises (Besserman and Mentzer, 2017; Lee et al., 2016).
Chemical manufacturing involves inducing chemical reactions under high temperature, high pressure, and other hazardous conditions. During the complicated process, chemical production is often faced with a high risk of equipment and materials, strict process parameters, and it is prone to fire, explosion, poisoning, and other accidents (Wang et al., 2020). Due to these properties, once the leakage of hazardous chemical substances occurs, it is easy to cause a major accident. In addition, when the primary accident propagates to nearby devices, the consequences of the accident could expand, and possibly result in a so-called domino effect accident (Chen and Reniers, 2020). In many cases, the consequence of a chemical disaster is severe (Lecue and Darbra, 2019; Wang et al., 2020). For instance, the explosion in Tianjiayi Chemical Plant, China in 2019 resulted in 78 fatalities and more than 617 injuries, with a direct economic loss of US$ 100 million; and more recently in 2020, the explosion in Beirut, Lebanon, led to at least 177 deaths and more than 6000 injuries.
Lack of safety awareness in the workplace, insufficient safety knowledge, and inadequate safety management are essential reasons for chemical accidents (Hemmatian et al., 2014). Looking back at the long and painful history of chemical accidents, as chemical safety researchers, we have felt the urgency to find a solution for the difficult relationship between the rapid development of the chemical industry and inadequate safety training. To prevent major disasters in the chemical industry, some chemical experts and scholars have pointed out that the government and universities should pay more attention to chemical process safety education (Brown et al., 2019; Lenihan et al., 2020; Mkpat et al., 2018; Perrin et al., 2018; Yong and Ashman, 2019). However, the existing research on talent training related to chemical process safety mainly focuses on a specific aspect, such as curriculum development (Dee et al., 2015; Louvar, 2009; Louvar and Hendershot, 2003; Mkpat et al., 2018; Perrin et al., 2018; Perrin and Laurent, 2008; Pitt, 2012), teaching methods (García-Fayos et al., 2020; Mkpat et al., 2018), or assessment methods (Pitt, 2012). Hence, there is a lack of research on overall talent training models related to chemical process safety which take the curriculum system, teaching methods as well as evaluation methods into account. Moreover, taking the curriculum development as an example, in most universities there exists a strong preference for the integration of process safety into the existing chemical engineering curriculum (Dee et al., 2015; Louvar, 2009; Perrin and Laurent, 2008; Spicer et al., 2013), but Mkpat et al. (2018) and Perrin et al. (2018) have confirmed that the integration would limit the viability of process safety education at an undergraduate level and lead to the lack of focus on process safety. Therefore, developing a systematic talent training model related to chemical process safety, with the purpose to reduce the risk factors of the chemical industry, is an important research topic.
This research aims to propose a novel talent training model related to chemical process safety, to accelerate the talent training for chemical process safety, and to provide a guarantee for improving the safety level in the chemical industry. China’s chemical industry has become the largest around the world and played a dominant role in the growth of the world chemical market (Chen and Reniers, 2020). Therefore, this article takes China as an example to research the talents training related to chemical process safety. The article attempts to answer the following questions:
•What is the current status and what are the existing problems as regards talent training of chemical process safety?•What is interdisciplinary education and how to apply it to the talent training of chemical process safety?•What should be the training goals for developing talents in chemical process safety?•How to build a talent training model related to chemical process safety based on interdisciplinary education, and what are its characteristics?
