Social influence is a crucial component of social network analysis used in a wide range of applications, including resource recommendation [4], [9], [18], viral marketing [16], [21], [25], and community detection [3], [10]. The subject of influence analysis consists of a set of problems that are central to the disciplines of computer science and sociology. In this field, the critical problem is to search a set of initial spreaders (seeds) for which receives the first-level of information and leads to an extensive range of influence spread. This problem is NP-hard, which is known as influence maximization (IM) [14].
The range of relationship-based information diffusion reflects a user’s influence ability. Almost all related work conventionally uses information cascade technology to model the processes of influence spread on real-world networks [4]. In the simple example of influence diffusion model (Fig. 1), users at the bottom of a diffusion chain are influenced by directly linked users (blue circles). Meanwhile, these users at the bottom are possible to be influenced by indirectly linked users according to the information diffusion theory [6]. However, there may be no information cascade between indirectly linked users (red dotted lines). Since the lack of directly measurable data, it is difficult to accurately simulate the diffusion [17]. In this example, it is easy to model the influence that spreads from user C to D. Then, users A and B are possible to influence user D, but it is hard to simulate the influence diffusion.Download : Download high-res image (35KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. A simple example of influence diffusion model.
Similar to the above example, the previously related methods cannot truly portray the processes of influence spread and thus lead to the errors of estimating influence probabilities. Moreover, the IM problem becomes more challenging since two or more competitive items exist in online social networks (OSNs), which but frequently happened in real life [5]. As an essential concept in social network analysis, evidence shows that trust is among the most important factors for users’ decision-makings [6]. Trust is a measure of confidence that an entity or entities will behave expectedly [2]. A trusted user could potentially lead users to accept his/her opinions and make informed decisions. Trust and distrust relationships play different roles in accepting and rejecting a user’s influence. Interest in the models of competitive influence diffusion involves trust relationships has been increasing over the past few years, and it is now an essential issue in influence maximization.
Extensive studies have explored the method of detecting seed sets [1], [5], [6], [8], [15], [16], [25], [31], [32], there are two typical approaches to maximizing competitive influence (detecting positive or negative seeds). While researchers generally concur that two opposite type of seeds are used in the spread of competitive influence, there is agreement in the literature that the CIM problem can be solved by detecting positive seeds [1], [16], [17], [19], [31]. However, the effect of trust in the spread of competitive influence has not yet been systematically investigated. Meanwhile, conventional methods typically block opponents’ influence in the spread of competitive influence. Preventing opponents’ influence seems to make no sense because it is in an unrealistic situation and takes high computational time [1]. Thus, it is essential to develop an effective method of maximizing positive influence, and this study focused on detecting positive seeds for the CIM problem. In addition, several recent works consider trust relationships in their IM algorithms, but these methods assume trust values are given directly [6], [30]. This simple assumption may result in inaccurate trust values and thus leads to the poor performance of detecting seeds. This study has primarily concerned with competitive influence modeling based on trust evaluation and the efficiency problem of seed detection.
In this study, we devised a new trust-based solution that addresses the above challenges, which maximizes positive influence on OSNs under competing cascades. This solution highlights the effect of trust relationships in the spread of competitive influence. First, we established a new model of trust-based competitive influence diffusion (TrCID) that simulates the dynamic spreads of competitive influence. Trust relationships are used to model positive influence, and distrust relationships are used to model negative influence. Next, we estimated trust values through generalized network flows and used these results to calculate positive influence probabilities in TrCID. Finally, we developed an algorithm of trust-based competitive influence maximization (TrCIM) that efficiently calculates the positive marginal gain for non-seed users. To our knowledge, this may be the first work on maximizing positive influence in competitive social networks based on trust evaluations. This study conducted various comparisons on synthetic and real-world datasets, and the experimental results illustrate that our method performs better than other baselines. The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows.
•This work established the TrCID model that simulates the dynamic spreads of competitive influence, which incorporates the factors of trust and time decay. Our method estimates influence probabilities between users based on trust evaluations.•This work developed the TrCIM algorithm that iteratively detects the seeds with the largest positive marginal gains. Meanwhile, this algorithm maintains good performance of spreading positive influence on OSNs.•This work conducted extensive comparisons on different datasets. The experimental results illustrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach, and it is more practical than other baselines on real-world social networks.
The plan of this paper is as follows. Section 2 presents related works. Section 3 defines the problem of maximizing competitive influence and presents a solution framework. Then, Sections 4 Competitive influence diffusion model, 5 Estimating influence probability, 6 Discovering seed set introduce the TrCID model, the method of estimating influence probabilities, and the TrCIM algorithm, respectively. Next, Section 7 provides the evaluation of our approach and other baselines. Finally, Section 8 presents some concluding remarks and future directions.
