Soil salinization and secondary salinization are the main problems of soil degradation in the world. Coastal saline soil, a major type of saline soil, is an important reserve land resource. However, poor soil quality parameters, such as low hydraulic characteristics, high salt content and organic matter deficiency, limit soil productivity (Yao et al., 2009). Therefore, it is important to improve the quality of coastal saline soil to increase the land use rate and protect the ecological environment (Yang, 2008). In recent years, biochar has been widely used as a soil amendment to improve soil quality (O’Laughlin and McElligott, 2009). The biochar studies focused on the biochemical effects on amended soil, such as pH value, CEC, crop yield, nitrogen and C sequestration potential (Atkinson et al., 2010; Mukherjee and Lal, 2013; Yoo et al., 2014). However, due to the highly porous structure and the large specific surface area of biochar, the soil physical and hydraulic properties, such as bulk density, water retention, hydraulic conductivity and porosity, may be modified (Castellini et al., 2015). Zhou et al. (2019) found that biochar enhances the hydraulic conductivity by decreasing soil bulk density and increasing soil porosity. Castellini et al. (2015) believed that biochar amendment significantly increases soil water retention. However, some studies have found that biochar has little or even negative effects on soil physical properties. Hardie et al. (2013) found no evidence to suggest that the application of biochar influenced soil porosity by either direct pore contribution, creation of accommodation pores, or improvement in aggregate stability. Fan et al. (2019) found that in a wheat-rice rotation system, the application of biochar provides the lowest porosity, macropores and pore connectivity. Such discrepancies indicate that the effects of biochar on soil structure and hydraulic properties are unclear.
The soil pore structure influences some soil physical properties and determines the supply, retention, and transport of soil moisture (Kong et al., 2016; Pagliai et al., 2004). Therefore, characterizing and quantifying soil pore structures are key to determining the effects of biochar on soil structure and hydraulic properties. In recent years, X-ray CT tomography has been used to quantify the internal pore structure of soils and to characterize their heterogeneity (Munkholm et al., 2003; Olsen and Trond, 1997; Torre et al., 2018). This tomography technique can be used to analyze the internal structure of the research object without destroying the sample, and it provides fast imaging and analysis compared with the scanning electron microscopy method (Zhu et al., 2019). Soil pore characteristics, such as pore shape, size, orientation and size distribution, can be determined accurately with the X-ray CT device (Rab et al., 2014). Furthermore, the CT method has promising applications to analyze soil science parameters, such as the measurement of soil hydraulic properties, soil quality and three-dimensional reconstruction (Alaoui et al., 2011; Elliot et al., 2010; Li et al., 2014). Therefore, X-ray CT tomography is a highly effective approach for analyzing the soil pore structure.
Fractal geometry has been employed for quantitatively characterizing the structure and heterogeneity of soil in recent years (Dathe et al., 2001; Kravchenko and Zhang, 1998; Tyler and Wheatcraft, 1989). Previous studies have focused on mass fractal and surface fractal dimensions (Dathe and Martin, 2005; Pachepsky et al., 1996; Perret et al., 2003). Perret et al. (2003) developed an algorithm to investigate the mass fractal dimension in three dimensions and observed an increasing trend between the fractal dimension and macroporosity. With the advance of computer technology, fractal parameters were derived directly through image analysis (Tarquis et al., 2003). However, when studying the fractal characteristics of soil pore properties, the difference of pore number in different regions is ignored, and the local characteristics of pore structure cannot be reflected in a single fractal dimension (Dathe et al., 2006). The single fractal dimension may not be sufficient to describe the structure and heterogeneity of soil structure (Kravchenko et al., 1999). Therefore, studies based on images have subsequently extended to multifractal analysis (Bird et al., 2006; Dathe et al., 2006; Posadas et al., 2003). Wang et al. (2018) proposed a novel method combining multifractal and geostatistics to quantify the soil particle size distribution (PSD) and found that this method could better reflect the whole characteristics of soil PSD in detail. However, recent studies on the multifractal features of soil focus on the soil pore structure or hydraulic characteristics (De Bartolo et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2016a). The relationship between soil pore structure and hydraulic characteristics is still unknown. Moreover, the multifractal method based on image analysis mainly adopted two-dimensional images (Dathe et al., 2006; Zhu et al., 2019), and less attention has been given to the analysis of three-dimensional images.
In this study, our objectives are to study (1) the effect of biochar amendment on the structure and hydraulic properties of saline soil, (2) the multifractal characteristics of soil pore structure based on three-dimensional image analysis and (3) the relationship between soil pore structure and hydraulic behaviors.
