The current linear systems of production and consumption are unsustainable. The necessity of extending objects’ useful life in industrialized societies is widely recognized as it makes better use of existing natural resources and creates less waste (e.g. Bakker et al., 2014). Addressing the lifetimes of objects is important for a circular economy, resource efficiency, waste reduction, and low-carbon strategies for sustainability. Within these debates, the call for the ‘right to repair’ has become ever louder, arguing that people should be empowered by giving them more possibilities to repair their objects at home instead of discarding them (e.g. Dewberry et al., 2016). The maintenance and repair of objects throughout their lifetime are acts that extend their useful life and contribute to a slower rate of consumption. Rather than considering consumption to stop at the point of acquisition, an examination of repair in everyday life points to the domestication of objects (e.g. Haddon, 2011) i.e. how they are acquired, integrated, used and/or rejected in people’s homes.
Repair initiatives (e.g. Repair Cafés1) have experienced a significant upswing in many industrialized countries in recent years (e.g. Keiller and Charter, 2014; Graziano and Trogal, 2017). A growing number of people fix their own objects through visiting monthly repair meetings in their neighbourhood. Within these initiatives, repairing and making is perceived as an emancipatory act where people claim their right to repair things, since – as the Repair Manifesto teaches us – ‘if you can’t fix it, you don’t own it’.2 The initiatives are involved in a variety of practices that go beyond fixing and making objects to include experiments in principled ideas of object’s useful life, circular economy and collaborative consumption (e.g. Dewberry et al., 2016; Isenhour and Reno, 2019). Initiatives enable repair of goods, whilst culturally engaging in repair is argued to cultivate post-consumerist values through stronger associations with the repaired objects (Rosner, 2013; Ratto and Boler, 2014).
Social scientific analyses of repair initiatives have started to emerge where repair is considered to be a collaborative act (e.g. Houston et al., 2016); however, less evident within these studies are questions relating to repairing objects at home (Gregson et al., 2009). A small group of research scholars concerned with the sociology of repair (e.g. Henke, 2000; Martinez, 2017; Jackson, 2019) have investigated repair, maintenance and ridding activities at home (e.g. Gregson, 2007, Gregson et al., 2009; Bix, 2009; Carr, 2017). In this paper, we draw on literature concerned with the performance of everyday practices (e.g. Maller, 2015) and the domestication of everyday technologies (e.g. Haddon, 2011) to go beyond early moments of acquisition of objects in people’s homes and interrogate moments of repair. Building particularly on the work of Gregson et al. (2009) the paper draws attention to several phases of repair: diagnosing, fixing and integrating (or ridding) objects that show how objects are part of recurring processes of adoption, use and integration.
In order to contribute further to the sociology of repair and link it to research on sustainable consumption in everyday life, the paper addresses the following research questions: What forms of repair work is performed at home and how are these performances linked to notions of prolonging the useful life of objects?
With these research questions in mind, the analysis draws on empirical evidence grounded within a citizen science research project on repair that brought together academic researchers, practitioners from repair network organisations, and regular visitors and fixers from Repair Cafés.
In the following, we briefly position the paper in the existing research on repair work at home before we present the conceptual framing of the research project. Then, we outline our methodological approach, drawing on citizen science research. This is then built on in the next section to detail the empirical findings, providing insights into repairing objects at home. Finally, we discuss the relevance of examining repair in everyday life and offer concluding reflections on its links to prolonging the useful life of objects.
