User interactions and proliferation of citizen journalism on microblogs such as Twitter and Facebook has led to the generation of enormous amounts of online content. The disseminated content on these platforms is also diverse e.g. text, videos, images or intra-user interactions via ‘retweets’, ‘mentions’ or ‘likes’. Considering the nature of the content and dynamism in intra-user connections, and specifically on Twitter, it is difficult to infer users’ interests. Ability to solve this issue is important in recommender systems research. Typically, recommender systems augment this personalization process by suggesting meaningful follower–followee relationships. On Twitter, user interests are majorly extrinsic based on their declared interests. However, dynamism in the disseminated content as well as changes in follower–followee relationships implies that user interests change over time. This poses the following questions : -

1.Is it possible to profile a user/group of users based on their disseminated microblog posts over time?2.Does homophily in microblog platforms friendship networks influence formulation of online user profiles?
Furthermore, interests that microblog users have towards certain topics change over time e.g. hashtags. Regarding user’s friendship networks, it is not correct to assume that a user and his/her followees share the same interests albeit to a certain threshold. It is typical for example for some microblog users to have lots of followers but not all of whom are followees. However, there is need for such users to create a network of influencers to propagate their content as well as receive relevant content from other actors with the same interests.
Therefore, we present a framework to compute the Degree of Interest that users may have towards a certain topic based on their disseminated content over time. As a case study, we consider interest in the sports betting, Swahili related chatter and daily news chatter as topics of interest in a generic Twitter dataset.
To the best of our knowledge, this work presents the first attempt at quantifying the degree of interest in a specific microblog topic by analyzing user’s short, sparse and noisy content over time. More precisely, the paper made following contributions.

1.We develop a framework for formulating user profiles based on short and noisy texts.2.We affirm the profiling process for the users by correlating it with user’s friendship network.3.We test the framework in three topics of interest, i.e. sports betting, swahili related chatter and daily news chatter. We also carried out an intensive experimental study in formulation of user representative profiles by analyzing their disseminated content over time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the background and related literature of our study. Our approach is described in Section 3. The experimental framework and the generation and validation of the results we obtained is presented in Section 4 while results are shown in Section 5. Conclusions and future work are summarized in Section 6.
