With the advent of high quality, low cost, user-friendly image editing tools, digital data can be easily modified not only by trained professionals but also by the most common digital camera users (Hou & Lee, 2017). As a result, a person can severely distort the actual meaning of the images by tampering the content in the images (Chen et al. 2016, D’Amiano et al., 2018). Nowadays, it is very popular in the case of second-hand markets where people tamper of the actual content to sell items as new at a higher price (Hou & Lee, 2017). One such emerging crime is that of forging the International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) numbers of smart phones for stealing and smuggling them illegally. Similarly, names and dates of air tickets are altered to enter airports by breaching security. These two issues are challenging and complex for forensic investigation. It is evident from the following links provided in the footnote on the first page that we can see in the news about the seriousness of the above-mentioned crimes. It can be noted from the links that there are smart and skilled people who can use powerful software tools for creating fake IMEI numbers and altered air tickets, which cannot be observed with the unaided eyes.
The reason to consider the above-two cases, namely, forged IMEI number detection and altered air ticket detection is that these two are sensitive applications relating to forensics and security, and hence they require urgent attention. It is noted that these applications are useful to society and are interesting topics for an expert system with applications. Furthermore, when we look at the complexity of the two issues, they are totally different because of the nature of the input images and the objective of the two cases. In the case of IMEI numbers, since the background is complex and it depends on the design of the mobile cases, it is not so easy to detect its forgery. Therefore, one can expect that a robust feature is required to handle the situation. This makes forged IMEI number detection more challenging. In the same way, in the case of an altered air ticket, since it is a document, we can expect a plain background in contrast to the complex background of IMEI images. Making forgeries of document images is easy compared to IMEI images. Therefore, the forgery operation may not introduce high variations or distortion as in IMEI images. This makes altered air ticket detection more challenging. Although the expectations are the same for the both issues, the degree of complexity is different. In other words, detecting forgeries is easy when the distortion created by a forgery operation is noticeable, while it is hard when the distortion is small. These two cases pose different challenges for forgery detection in images. Developing a method that can work for both cases is an open issue. In order to show the proposed method is robust to different situations (clutter and plain background images), and independent of the content of the input image, we consider two different cases in this work as case studies. Finding a solution to such a complex problem requires a new expert system, which illustrates a substantial difference compared to existing work.
Examples of fake IMEI numbers and air ticket information created using copy-paste and insertion operations are shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2, respectively. Copy-paste and insertions are standard operations for creating fake images (Chen et al. 2016, Feng et al., 2017, D’Amiano et al., 2018) in the realm of forgery. In the case of insertions, tools can be used to insert characters or numbers for creating forgeries. It is noted from Fig. 1, Fig. 2 that the original IMEI numbers and air ticket information are marked by green rectangles, as shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2(a) on the left side, which are used to create forged IMEI and air ticket information, respectively. These forgeries are marked by a red rectangle as shown on the right-hand side. In Fig. 1, Fig. 2, when we look at the extracted original and forged images shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2(b-d), it is hard to notice the difference between the original images and the forged ones without some knowledge of the forged information.Download : Download high-res image (812KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Examples of copy-paste and insertion operations for creating forged IMEI number images.Download : Download high-res image (735KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. Example of copy-paste and insertion operations for creating forged air ticket images.
Hence, detecting forged IMEI numbers and altered air tickets is a challenging problem. There are many methods proposed in the literature for forging images and videos in different ways (Chen et al. 2016, Feng et al., 2017, D’Amiano et al., 2018), which use texture, color, gradient, blur artifacts, etc. However, the primary objective of the methods is to address the challenges of video and general images but not documents like forged IMEI and altered air tickets which require robust features. Similarly, we can find methods for spoof detection in the case of identifying biometrics for person identification (Kho et al., 2019), which are generally used for enhancing security systems. These methods focus on biometric information, such as fingerprints and face images but not IMEI numbers and air ticket images.
There are methods proposed for authenticating personal identity based on signature verification and identification (Behera et al., 2018, Bouamra et al., 2018, Sharma and Sundaram, 2018). The methods are able to identify forged and genuine signatures based on misalignment caused by forgery operations. However, the scope of the method does not cover forged IMEI numbers and altered air ticket images because these methods are limited to handwriting text and online writing information. Similar to the proposed work, there are methods for tampered text detection from video images (Shivakumara et al., 2014, Xu et al., 2014, Bhardwaj and Pankajakshan, 2016, Roy et al., 2016), which focus on text properties to identify forged text, that is, edited text and scene text, which is considered as natural text in the video. In other words, the methods differentiate caption and scene text in video images based on text properties. However, these methods work well when the whole word or text line gets affected by forgery operations.
It is also noted from the literature (Gupta et al. 2016, Yue et al., 2019) that methods have been developed for generating artificial synthetic scene characters and text images using source information, which can be used for improving recognition performance. Since the objective of the methods is to generate text which is similar to the source image, the generated text may not be the same as the source images. As a result, the generated text can be an entirely different image from the original. Therefore, these methods may not be appropriate for forged IMEI number and altered air ticket detection because forged text appears exactly the same way as in the original images with some alterations. Hence, the problem is challenging and unsolved, and there is an urgent need for developing an effective and robust approach.
The organization of the rest of the paper is as follows. Section 2 discusses background of the proposed work. This section also reviews the existing methods of forgery detection in imagery and document images to highlight the state-of-the-art and challenges, which have been addressed or not addressed so far. In Section 3, the details of the proposed method for solving the problem of forgery detection in the images are presented. Furthermore, the proposed method is divided into two sub-sections. The process for obtaining the phase spectrum using DCT and the Fourier transform is presented in sub-section 3.1. The phase statistics are defined in sub-section 3.2. The results to validate the proposed method are presented in Section 4. Finally, conclusions and future work are discussed in Section 5.
