Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a debilitating psychiatric illness with high prevalence (Hasin et al., 2018), which is characterized by persistent negative thoughts and anhedonia. The contemporary routine clinical practice regarding the treatment of MDD confronts urgent challenges. The syndrome-based classification of MDD is not based on objective markers and does not guide treatment selection, which is closely related to a low diagnostic rate and delayed antidepressant response (Stephan et al., 2016; World Health Organization, 2017). Early diagnostic identification with noninvasive biomarkers can promote the initiation of antidepressant medication and relieve suffering from the disease (Szegedi et al., 2009). Importantly, predicting antidepressant efficacy in the early phases of treatment will substantially facilitate the timely adjustment of treatment strategies and reduce medical costs (Kudlow et al., 2014).
Emerging evidence from magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies has consistently indicated that altered intrinsic function of the default mode network (DMN) and reward network were substantially implicated in the neuropathology of MDD (Downar et al., 2014; Foti et al., 2014; Hamilton et al., 2015). Specifically, the key characteristics of depression such as depressive rumination and anhedonia are considered to be related to the dysfunction of the DMN and reward network, respectively (Borsini et al., 2020; Hamilton et al., 2015; Kaiser et al., 2019). Our previous studies also explored distinct resting-state features and temporal reconfiguration in the reward network were related to the severity of depression and treatment responsivity (Hou et al., 2018a; Hou et al., 2018b), thereby reinvigorating the exploration for putative diagnostic markers and predictors of treatment response using dynamic network measures.
Recent studies have examined quantified dynamic reorganization in the DMN using a novel concept of the dominant coactivation pattern (dCAP) (Chen et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2018), which enhances the spatial signal-to-noise ratio and overall computational efficiency relative to conventional sliding-window analyses. Importantly, a recent study reported that the greater network dynamics (i.e., dominance and transition) of frontoinsular-default network states were significantly related to the higher rumination in adolescent depression (Kaiser et al., 2019). However, the predictive performance of dCAP in diagnosing the depressed adults and demarcating the responders to treatment is still undetermined.
In sum, the early identification of MDD is crucial for proper initiation of antidepressant treatment, and the early response to medication is considered an informative milestone for the subsequent long-term outcomes. Therefore, addressing those issues can substantially contribute to the goal of early diagnosis and personalized medication, especially with the combination of a unique sample (first-episode drug-naïve MDD patients) and the follow-up of treatment effectiveness after the first pharmacological intervention. However, noninvasive imaging markers that can robustly discriminate the MDD patients and predict early response are still poorly defined. In the present study, we primarily explored the potential nuances of the dCAP in the subnetworks of DMN and reward network in first-episode unmedicated MDD patients, and verified whether those metrics can qualify as promising diagnostic or predictive markers in routine clinical practice.
