Developments in mobile technologies are increasing day by day and make people choose mobile devices more. The fact that the internet is now more easily accessible (Revilla, Cornilleau, Cousteaux, Legleye and de Pedraza, 2016) can be said to increase the choice of mobile devices. It is thought that features such as ease of use and accessibility make mobile technologies attractive. Mobile phones certainly are the most preferred mobile devices. The fact that as of 2019, the rate of mobile phone use in the world has reached 67% and the active use of social media in mobile usage has reached 42% (We are Social, 2019) show that mobile phones have become a part of our lives (Lee, Tam, and Chie, 2014). There are approximately 4 billion mobile users in the world and they spend approximately six and a half hours on the Internet every day (We are Social, 2019). The rate of mobile phone use in the USA is 58% (Anderson, 2019). In the United Kingdom, it was found that one in four children aged 0–2 and one in three children aged 3–5 had tablets and used tablets for at least one hour a day (Livingstone, 2016). Kabali et al. (2015) found as a result of their research with low-income families that almost all children under the age of four use mobile devices and that almost three-quarters of four-year-olds have their own mobile devices. It is seen that the most popular devices among young children are touch screen mobile devices and this trend is increasing rapidly (Papadakis, Kalogiannakis, and Zaranis, 2017). This shows that individuals use mobile devices extensively and social media applications play an active role in this use. The fact that the age of owning mobile technologies has decreased and the intensive use of mobile technologies necessitates the use of these technologies for learning purposes makes mobile learning more important.
Moldovan, Weibelzahl, and Muntean (2014) describe mobile learning as access to the content of learners at any time and place with mobile devices and wireless internet access. Dhanalakshmi, Suganya, and Kokilavani (2014) emphasize cloud technology and space–time flexibility in mobile learning. From a learner-centered perspective, mobile learning can also be considered as a learning method based on flexible and easy use of learners as well as supporting mobile device use or lifelong learning (Karataş et al., 2016) and the combination of mobile computing and e-learning (Keengwe and Maxfield, 2014). It is also emphasized that portability, immediacy, connectivity, ubiquity, and adaptability of mobile learning are important (Chee, Yahaya, Ibrahim, and Hasan, 2017).
When the literature is examined, it is understood that initially the definition of mobile learning was made based on the realization of learning by using mobile devices and wireless technologies (Karataş et al., 2016) and with the development of mobile device technology, the devices also changed in the definition. In short, mobile learning can be defined as “a form of learning that enables individuals to acquire experiences through individual or collaborative learning with the activities of accessing, producing and managing information through digital interaction using portable devices”.
1.1. The importance of mobile learningThe use of mobile and wireless technologies as a learning tool has been a developing learning approach in recent years (Sarrab, Elbasir, and Alnaeli, 2016). Mobility is one of the unique features that make the mobile learning platform the new educational platform (Alrasheedi and Capretz, 2015). In higher education, the majority of students adopt mobile learning (Abu-Al-Aish and Love, 2013). In the learning process, students use mobile devices and smartphones to access information (Seliaman and Al-Turki, 2012). The use of mobile devices and the adoption of mobile learning by students indicate that mobile learning is an area that needs to be emphasized and taken into consideration.As can be understood from the definition of mobile learning, it is preferred because of its many advantages such as space and time flexibility, easy access to information and easy use. It is understood that the researches on this subject confirm this situation. Mobile learning gives ubiquitous learning opportunities according to the suitability of students (M. J. W. Lee and Chan, 2007). Mobile technologies allow students to access the content of the courses and provide opportunities for cooperative learning by interacting with friends outside the classroom (Gikas and Grant, 2013). The use of mobile devices everywhere makes learning important, supporting students' academic performance and motivation (Chen, Chang, and Wang, 2008). Therefore, one can argue that the features of mobile learning tools affect the preferences of the learners and consequently have the potential to contribute to the learning performance.
1.2. Limitation of mobile learningAsabere (2013) argues that there are difficulties such as lack of a specific monitoring system in mobile learning, the differences in technical knowledge of students, the state of having mobile connection and inadequacy in practical courses. It is suggested that students' use of mobile phones in the course may negatively affect their focus on the lesson (Burns and Lohenry, 2010) and decrease their performance (Duncan, Hoekstra, and Wilcox, 2012). Alsswey and Al-Samarraie (2019), emphasize that there may be difficulties arising from factors such as technical competence, infrastructure, difficulty in managing the process, sociocultural factors and individual abilities in the adaptation of mobile learning to teaching environments. On the other hand, Hwang and Wu (2014) emphasize that in the mobile learning process learners may turn to digital gaming or social media and face the risk of misleading.
1.3. Related researchesIn a meta-analysis of mobile learning, 164 studies published between 2003 and 2010 were examined (Wu et al., 2012). As a result of this study, it has been determined that the number of researches based on mobile learning is increasing. The related researches mostly focus on the effectiveness and mobile learning system design. It has been predicted that smartphones and personal digital assistants (PDAs) are the most common mobile devices in mobile learning, but these devices may change in the years after 2010. The most cited articles focused on the design of mobile learning systems and their effectiveness. In addition, it was concluded that the use of mobile devices is common in higher education and primary education.Fu and Hwang (2018) examined 90 articles on mobile technology-assisted cooperative learning between 2007 and 2016 in their systematic review. The results show that the number of studies on mobile cooperative learning has increased and the connection between new mobile technologies and cooperative learning activities has been strengthened. In addition, it was seen that studies on mobile learning focused on university students more than teachers and adults. Fu and Hwang (2018) suggested that primary and secondary school students should be focused on as a result of their research. It emerged that recent researches mostly aimed at increasing performance in science, social and natural extra class scenarios, and not on developing learner skills and high-level skills. It was also emphasized that collaborative learning activities in mobile learning environments should be designed more carefully.In the field of mobile learning, the number of research on mobile learning adaptation has increased to a large extent (Kumar and Chand, 2019). In a study conducted in Turkey, it was seen that mobile learning research is more oriented towards application and development, smartphones are used mostly as mobile learning tools and mobile learning is mostly applied in foreign language teaching (Zengin, Şengel, and Özdemir, 2018). In another meta-analysis, 10 studies were analyzed and it was found that mobile learning had a positive and large effect size (0.849) on academic achievement (Güzeller and Üstünel, 2016). According to another study, mobile learning is a developing area in higher education. Studies in which mobile learning applications and systems are applied are widespread and smartphones are still the most commonly used mobile devices in mobile learning studies. However, a significant point in this cluster of research, the diversity of mobile devices examined in new studies has increased (Krull and Duart, 2017).Bano, Zowghi, Kearney, Schuck, and Aubusson (2018), focusing on the use of mobile learning applications in science and mathematics education, examined 49 researches by systematic review and found that augmented reality (AR) applications are the most commonly used applications in mobile learning. In science education, it was found that the researchers mostly used their own designed applications and in mathematics education, other existing applications were preferred. It was also understood that cooperative learning, inquiry-based learning and project/problem-based learning approaches were adopted.In another study from 2010 to 2015 (Chee et al., 2017), Taiwan was found as the most dominant country contributing to mobile learning research, the British Journal of Educational Technology and Educational Technology & Society were detected as journals regularly publishing on mobile learning. It is understood that the researches aim at examining the publications on the effectiveness of mobile learning and review of the studies on mobile learning. In addition, it was found that studies were conducted at the higher education level followed by primary education. Research on mobile learning has often shown positive results and supports learning in the fields of language, arts, and science. It has found that mobile learning is mostly used informally and the most widely used device is smartphones.When the literature is examined, it is seen that there are studies that reveal the systematic review or meta-analysis of the researches in the field of mobile learning. All these studies show that research on mobile learning has increased in recent years. This reveals that mobile learning is an important and developing field in improving learning performance. Although there is a number of a studies about mobile learning, there is no study that is designed with a bibliometric mapping method, which covers mobile learning in a broader context and reveals network visualization maps in terms of different variables. From the meta-data of all years of research on mobile learning, it is important to identify bibliometric maps by analyzing the mobile learning area in the context of variables such as authors, citations, countries, keywords, publications, universities, and journals. In this context, the following research questions were sought in our study:In the field of mobile learning;(1)What is the status of co-authorship?(2)What is the distribution and trend of keywords?(3)What is the position of researchers to cite similar publications?(4)Who are the most influential authors?(5)Which are the most influential publications?(6)Which are the most influential journals?(7)Which are the most influential countries and universities?
