Rebels are individuals who exercise opposition to the government using force or armed resistance. They use social media to share their ideology. As, social media allows users to share a broad range of content, which encourages rebel users to disseminate propaganda with the aim of attracting and recruiting others to their cause to convince people. The aim of such is to gain funding, sympathies, and recruitment through social media. In the past, an extremist group has used its popularity in social media to recruit about 15,000 foreign fighters across the globe (Schneider, 2015).
The proposed research investigates key features and patterns in identifying rebel users on Twitter. These features and patterns not only identify rebel users, but they may be applicable in identifying global miscreant users. The proposed framework Supervised Rebel Identification (SRI) is the first of its kind, which can function as a benchmark for future research. Besides that, the proposed framework may help governments to promptly identify rebel users and resolve their grievances.
Researchers have not yet focused on developing a dataset of rebel users. As a result, this research aims at developing a dataset constituting rebel, counter rebel, and normal users. Rebels are the users who forcefully challenge the government entities, formally defined in Section 2. Counter rebel users are the normal users except that they share more tweets against the rebellious movements (defined in Section 2). Finally, the normal users are those who share tweets on any topic, as discussed in Section 2.
As the behavior/pattern of the rebel users tends to pertain to social aspects, cultural norms, laws, and region, we develop a multicultural and multiregional dataset of nine rebellious movements. These rebellious movements are picked using various criterion, which are discussed in detail in Section 4. The proposed multicultural and multiregional dataset allows the proposed model to identify generalized patterns on a diverse set of rebel users.
This research has the following contributions:
1.We present a new dataset having more than 284,000 tweets of both rebel, counter rebel, and normal users. The proposed dataset targets nine rebellious movements active in five countries: United Kingdom, Turkey, Syria, Iraq, and Pakistan.2.We propose a novel user graph to structure the tweets in a way similar to an ontology. The proposed user graph highlights the ideology and stance of a user.3.We propose fifteen features belonging to three categories (contents, user profile, and graph embedding features) to identify rebel users.4.We analyze various aspects of rebel, counter rebel, and normal users.
