According to the Global Status Report (WHO, 2018), there were 1.35 million deaths in road accidents in 2018, an estimated 3700 road deaths per day worldwide. As reported by the CARE database (European Commission, 2018), 25,300 people died in road accidents in Europe in 2017. The highest number of accidents and deaths on the road is among young adults between 18 and 25 years of age (IRTAD, 2018). These data invite one to reflect on the relation between drivers’ experience and their skill in perceiving hazards on the road and estimating risk. Without a doubt, both processes influence the way traffic hazards are seen and interpreted.
In driving, as in other activities like practising a sport (Rowe2009), it is not only the skill with which it is practised that matters but also the risk assumed in carrying it out (McKenna et al., 2006). Already in Elander, 1993, West and French indicated that these two aspects, the propensity to take risks and Hazard Prediction skill, should be measured independently. The nature of these two processes, skill in perceiving hazards and risk estimation, need to be analysed because there might be empirical differences between the two that could require specific interventions (Parker et al., 1995; Sagberg and Børnskau, 2006).
According to Horswill and McKenna (2004, p. 155), “Of all the different components of driving skill, only hazard perception has been found to relate to accident involvement across a number of studies”. It is clear that having well-developed hazard perception skills does not guarantee safe driving, although not having these skills does present a substantial threat to the driver's safety (McKenna and Crick, 1997).
The skill of hazard perception varies among drivers but it also varies in the same driver over time (McKenna and Crick, 1997) as s/he gains experience in driving (Crundall, 2016). Thus, it is necessary for drivers without experience and novices to acquire the skill of HP before getting behind the wheel.
The classic test to assess Hazard Perception consists of videos shown on a computer and recorded from the driver's perspective, where the examinees have to press a key at the moment they detect a hazard on the road. Thus, what is being measured is the time it takes the user to detect a hazard. Wells, Tong, Sexton, Grayson and Jones (2008) found that road accidents due to excessive speed were reduced by 11% in the UK a year after including the Hazard Perception Test for obtaining a driving license. To what extent the improvements obtained in anticipating hazards using these tests can be extrapolated to real driving and whether they succeed in reducing accidents has also been analysed (e.g. Hill et al., 2019; Horswill, 2016b).
An alternative to this test is the Hazard Prediction test, which uses the “What happens next?” (WHN) question, measuring the Situational Awareness of the driver (Endsley, 1995). This includes the perception and location of obstacles present, which is essential for analysing and understanding the situation and thus being able to project and predict which will be potential dangers (Jackson et al., 2009). The Hazard Prediction task consists of presenting a series of videos recorded from the driver's perspective, in which just before the hazard develops, the video is suddenly cut with a black screen (just before a hazardous incident unfolds) and the examinee is asked what is the hazard, where it is located and what they think will happen next, thus showing their ability to predict hazards. Recently, Horswill, Hill and Jackson (2020) reported that Hazard Prediction test scores are associated not only with driver experience but also with self-reported crash involvement. In addition, the Hazard Prediction test scores correlate with the computer-based response-time of traditional Hazard Perception tests.
It would be possible to improve this ability to “read the road” and anticipate hazards, using short proactive training programmes in Hazard Prediction for example, commentary training (Castro et al., 2016; Crundall, Andrews, van Loon and Chapman, 2010; Horswill et al., 2010, 2017; Isler et al., 2008; Wetton et al., 2013), which speeds up the process by which drivers can learn to survey the road situation, and makes up for the deficiencies of novices in visual search strategies (Zheng et al., 2020).
Moreover, it should be taken into account that the hazards drivers can face are diverse and may require specific interventions. This has been reflected in research, which has found differences in execution by drivers facing different types of hazard. For example, Vlakveld et al. (2011) manipulated the presentation of completely visible (“overt”) hazards as opposed to the (“covert”) hazards that could at any moment be temporarily and/or partially concealed by elements of the surroundings hidden from vision by bushes, parked vehicles, etc. Crundall et al. (2012) differentiated between the obstacles for which a Behavioural Prediction could be made (e.g., a pedestrian walking uncertainly on the pavement and suddenly crossing) vs. Environmental Prediction (e.g., a delivery van with doors open provides the clue to anticipating that the delivery man might cross the street). Borowsky and Oron-Gilad (2013) also reported that when drivers categorised the videos of hazardous situations according to the likelihood of a crash, “imminent hazards” with the highest likelihood of resulting in a crash required an evasive response, while “materialised hazards” did not require a response and such situations were therefore less likely to result in a crash.
Previous studies have assessed drivers' visual attention at intersections (Robbins et al., 2019) and in response to advertising signs and billboards, using eye movement recorded during simulated driving (Costa et al., 2019; Edquist et al., 2011; and Zahabi et al., 2017). Attention to hazards has also been explored by manipulating some characteristics of the hazards, such as e.g., abrupt vs. gradual presentation (Underwood et al., 2013). While abrupt hazards induce shorter saccadic latencies than gradual onsets, gradual hazards increase the duration of processing, especially when drivers are distracted with a secondary task (D'Addarioa and Donmez, 2019).
Other studies have explored attentional capture when distractors (presented in different locations to that of the hazard) share (or do not share) target properties. For example, Arexis et al. (2017) asked participants to search for a red target embedded within simulated driving scenes, while the GPS could be turned on with a distractor that could be displayed in the same colour as the target or in a different colour. Distractor capture effects only appeared when the distractor was not presented frequently, and were larger if a secondary task was being performed concurrently. Pierce and Andersen (2014) also explored attentional capture of visual stimuli, manipulating depth and horizontal position, and demonstrated differential effects of these variables for young and older drivers.
Our study will explore for the first time whether attentional capture produced by a cue/“potential hazard”, which could be presented in the same spatial location as the target/“developing hazard”, in a different spatial location or not presented at all, has an impact on hazard detection in driving situations. A “potential hazard” is a traffic event the driver needs to be aware of but which “does not require him/her to take any action”. A “developing hazard” is a traffic event that requires the driver to take some kind of action: “slowing down, stopping or changing direction” in order to avoid a collision (Ventsislavova et al., 2016).
To study attentional capture, Posner (1980) and his collaborators used a simple laboratory task known as the “Spatial Orienting Paradigm” (Chica et al., 2014). In this task, valid and invalid signals (cue) precede the upcoming target: valid signals are those that direct the attention to a location where something relevant is going to appear; invalid signals occur in a location where nothing relevant is going to happen. Numerous studies have demonstrated that detection and discrimination processes are faster after valid than invalid signals. Orienting of attention in space can be controlled either endogenously by the system (endogenous orienting of attention, which is also known as top-down or voluntary attention), or exogenously, by external stimulation (exogenous orienting of attention or bottom-up, involuntary stimulus-driven attention) (Chica et al., 2013). In driving situations where a potential hazard appears abruptly (Castro et al., 2016), orientation may be directed involuntarily towards the new hazard since the appearance of a new stimulus can attract the driver's attention even when it is focused on another area (Yantis and Jonides, 1990). Moreover, to be effective, their attention needs to be quickly removed from signals that are not relevant (Klein, 2000), in order to constantly update the information about their visual surroundings, and even more so in the traffic environment. It could be that the ability to disengage the attention from the distracting stimuli that capture it increases as participants gain experience in driving (Castro et al., 2019). Underwood (2007) also found that visual search skills improve as the driver gains experience and drivers develop strategies that guide their visual search for hazards on different kinds of road. These strategies could help prioritise the areas of the visual scene most likely to produce hazards (i.e. “priority areas”, Torralba et al., 2006). However, if these strategies are still developing, as is the case with inexperienced or novice participants, there could be a greater probability that these highly prominent objects capture their attention despite their irrelevance to the goals of the task. This suggests that experience has a role in overcoming the negative effect of distraction in driving (Castro et al., 2019).
Risk is an estimated quantity referring to the subjective experience provoked by traffic hazards (Deery, 1999). Risk Estimation can also be considered as a subjective judgment with regard to the degree of probability of some harmful or adverse effect being suffered or of a dangerous event occurring in the perceived situation (McKenna and Crick, 1991) and a higher level of Risk Estimation for a particular behaviour is associated with a lower probability that an individual would participate in this behaviour. However, the under-estimation of risk may increase with participation in risky behaviours that do not have negative consequences such as injuries or sanctions. In this case, Risk Estimation may be related to the consequences of the behaviour (Machin and Sankey, 2008).
Young drivers with little driving experience under-estimate risk and over-estimate their driving skills (Farrand and McKenna, 2001). Risk Estimation can play an important role in explaining driving infractions (Delhomme et al., 2012; Machin and Sankey, 2008). Moreover, poor Risk Estimation skills are negatively related to risky behaviour in general (Cohn et al., 1995). It could be said that under-estimation of risk on the road is associated with lower Risk Estimation in other spheres of life (Weber et al., 2002). Re-offenders have a worse Risk Estimation than non-reoffender drivers, at least in what are referred to as recreational, financial, health and safety and ethical spheres, measured on the self-reported DOSPERT scale (Padilla et al., 2018). Therefore, reoffending on the road could be the tip of the iceberg that might help detect other problems equally or more serious, affecting health, work, or on the social, personal or family level, and which need evaluation and intervention.
1.1. Research proposalThe aim of the present work is to develop a new Hazard Prediction test, the validity of which could render it of use in future investigations to measure Hazard Prediction and Risk Estimation. We will calculate its psychometric properties and expect it to be capable of discriminating between drivers with different degrees of driving experience (Crundall, 2016) and between the different types of attentional signals (Chica et al., 2013).When analysing Hazard Prediction, it is hypothesised that invalid and valid hazard trials will elicit lower scores in the Hazard Prediction test than in simple hazard trials. It is also hypothesised that an interaction will be found between experience and the spatial orientation of attention if more experienced drivers manage to compensate for the automatic attentional effect and/or disengage their attention earlier, causing them to be less affected by invalid signals. We therefore hypothesise different orienting of attention in drivers according to their experience, with a larger cost (drivers will score worse in the HPr test) for invalid as compared to valid signals for novices in comparison with experienced drivers.When analysing Risk Estimation, it is hypothesised that invalid and valid hazard situations (a potential hazard plus a developing hazard) may be considered more dangerous than simple ones (1 developing hazard) because they are more complex at the point when the video is cut. Furthermore, in complex situations, invalid ones could be considered more dangerous (with higher risk ratings) because they require the driver's attention to be disengaged from another location (potential hazard) where the hazard is spotted to where it needs attending to (developing hazard).
