Cyber security losses due to successful cyber attacks grow every year (McCausland et al., 2017; Symantec:, 2018). This increase can be explained by a number of factors, such as increasing reliance of business and society on IT systems, fast growth of the number of interconnected end devices, lack of security awareness, maturation of the cyber crime world (Cisco:, 2017; Homoliak et al., 2019), etc. These losses have already spurred top management of companies to consider cyber security risks among the most significant ones.
Typically, organisations have 4 basic options to treat risks: avoid it by abandoning risky business, reduce it by implementing security controls, transfer it to another entity (e.g., buy insurance), accept it if there is no other suitable choice (Miguel, Candau, Manás, 2014, NIST, 2013, Richard, James, Lisa, Wilson). The decision about treating cyber risks must be taken after careful analysis of the available options and ensuring that the selected strategy is cost-effective. Among the four risk treatment options, risk reduction and risk transferring require particular attention, because both of them require additional investments. Thus, organisations need an instrument which helps them to identify the required investments in different risk treatment strategies to minimise the expected losses.
Cyber insurance has received a lot of attention recently as more and more insurance companies enter the cyber market and their products become more mature. Also, numerous research papers devote significant attention to this topic (Böhme, Laube, Riek, 2019, Dambra, Bilge, Balzarotti, 2020, Marotta, Martinelli, Nanni, Orlando, Yautsiukhin, 2017; PartnerRe:, 2019). For instance, Dambra et al. (2020); Marotta et al. (2017) systematically reviewed the problems related to cyber insurance, where (Dambra et al., 2020) points out that the area needs more technical-oriented solutions to replace qualitative analysis. Some researchers further investigated the relation between cyber insurance and security investment. For instance, Massacci et al. (2017) highlighted that cyber insurance might trigger the drop of security investment when attackers are fully informed about the security posture of an organisation. On the other hand, several works are devoted to making cyber insurance market profitable and encouraging organisation to invest in self-protection (Bruce, 2001, Marotta, Martinelli, Nanni, Orlando, Yautsiukhin, 2017, Ruperto, Yurcik, Jay, 2006). The models used in the literature help to identify the most appropriate amount of investments in insurance and self-protection. These investment models simply assume that the probability of an attack is dependent on the amount of investment. In other words, the models do not tell how the organisation should spend these investments, i.e., how to select the required security configuration. Moreover, these models consider one threat (and one investment to probability dependency) while in reality organisation faces several cyber threats of a different kind which may cause different losses (e.g., see examples of threats from the ISO27005 standard ISO/IEC, 2018).
Risk reduction requires definition and implementation of a security configuration by the installation of various security controls to reduce the risk. Thus, an optimisation problem should be solved here, to select the most cost-efficient controls. For instance, in Chandramouli (2019); Chandramouli et al. (2017); NIST (2013), the authors defined potential threats and controls in different systems, while an organisation may find it difficult to implement all required controls.
A typical mathematical problem to address the variety of choices is the family of knapsack problems (Bartholdi III, 2008, Fielder, Panaousis, Malacaria, Hankin, Smeraldi, 2016, Hristakeva, Shrestha, 2004, Smeraldi, Malacaria, 2014). A direct formulation for selection of cyber security configuration (Bazgan et al., 2009) has several limitations. First, the knapsack problem will always use as much of the budget as the limit allows (taking into account the discrete costs for security controls), even if the application of security controls provide fewer benefits (in the reduction of cyber risks) than their costs. Naturally, this approach is not the most cost-effective.
Second, usage of risk as the utility function makes the solution computationally ineffective (i.e., existing pseudo-polynomial solutions, like dynamic programming, cannot be applied). In some specific cases, if just one threat is considered (Iliev et al., 2019; Symantec:, 2018 efficient solutions are possible, but for a comprehensive case the computation is not trivial. Therefore, many researchers apply approximate solutions (e.g., Genetic Algorithms (GA) Gupta, 2013, Rees, Deane, Rakes, Baker, 2011), accepting the risk of receiving the only near-optimal answer. We look for a satisfying solution in the sense of Simon (2019).
1.1. Main contributionsThe core contribution of this paper is an approach for risk-averse organisations to determine security investments in various risk treatment options (in particular for risk reduction and cyber insurance) and determine specific security controls to be applied. In particular, this article provides•a theoretical analysis of the distribution of the cost-efficient investments if cyber insurance is available,•an explicit model to link investments with selected security controls, assuming that some initially selected controls could be not optimal,•an exact solution for solving the optimisation problem (based on multi-objective knapsack problem),•analysis of the proposed algorithms and approximate solutions (Greedy and GA), considering the effect of quantity and quality of inputs on the results.The theoretical analysis is based on the utility theory and assumes a competitive insurance market in place. The resulting optimisation problem is represented as a multi-objective knapsack problem where minimisation of risks for every threat is a separate objective. The algorithmic solutions for the problem are based on the dynamic programming (Bazgan et al., 2009). Moreover, we enhance the algorithm by applying our projection idea and compare the results by conducting several experiments.This paper is organised as follows. We start with the analysis of the related literature in Section 2. Section 3 is dedicated to the formal problem statement definition and detailed discussion on its applicability. Section 4 is devoted to the adaptation of the existing algorithmic solutions for our problem. Section 5 provides experimental results comparing the proposed algorithms with some approximate solutions (i.e., Greedy and Genetic Algorithms) and analyse their applicability. Section 6 systematically discusses the assumptions we consider in the paper and proposes further directions to extend our work. Finally, conclusion and achieved results are outlined in Section 7.
