We are living in an era where data is being generated at a significantly fast pace (IBM 2017), and this trend is likely to continue in the foreseeable future. Such a trend also necessitates the availability of platforms where data can be stored and exchanged reliably. Information exchange is typically controlled and centralized by some third-party entity. For instance, a financial transaction between two entities (e.g. consumer and the resource provider such as supermarket), a financial institution or credit card provider plays an intermediary role to complete the transaction and the two involved entities in the transaction must trust the third-party. In providing the trusted service, the financial institution or credit card provider imposes a transaction processing fee. This process is typical in many other domains, such as healthcare and real estate. There are, however, situations where reliance on a centralized third-party entity is not desirable. Thus, there have been attempts to explore the potential of utilizing blockchain technology.
Blockchain technology provides a decentralized platform where information can be exchanged without relying on an external third-party entity. As a distributed ledger, blockchain stores a copy of completed transactions on top of a peer-to-peer network (M. Dabbagh et al., 2019). The information about each completed transaction in the blockchain is immutable and also available to every involved party. These key features make blockchain technology a potential solution to facilitate enhanced security, reliability, transparency, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness of information processing. Although blockchain was initially applied to digital currency (i.e., Bitcoin) (Nakamoto, 2008), it has the potential to be applied in other settings and sectors, such as smart cities (Makhdoom et al., 2020), healthcare (Zhang et al., 2016; Esposito et al., 2018), insurance (Gatteschi et al., 2018), education (Sharples and Domingue, 2016), supply chain management (Kshetri, 2018), Internet of Things (IoT) (M. Dabbagh et al., 2019; Ali et al., 2019), 5 G networks (Tahir et al., 2020), etc. For example, over $1 billion investment was reportedly made by technical and financial firms in 2016 to deploy blockchain technology into their businesses (Harty, 2018).
As its name suggests, blockchain is a chain of connected blocks where each block comprises multiple records of transactions. The security of these records depends mainly on the underlying cryptographic algorithms. Each block in a blockchain is associated with a unique identifier (i.e., hash), which is produced based on the data stored in that particular block, and the hash of the previous block. This allows the detection of any manipulation to a block of data, since the modification will result in the alteration of the hash of the modified block, as well as the other subsequent linked blocks. In other words, the hash identifiers play a critical role in ensuring the security and immutability of the blockchain. The decentralized feature of blockchain also makes it more resistant to attacks, for example miniziming the risk of single point of failure since multiple copies of data are replicated among all peers in the network. However, other conditions and factors need to be taken into consideration prior to deploying a blockchain in practice. There are two types of blockchain platforms, namely: permissionless and permissioned. Although both types of platforms share some similar characteristics, their key differences can influence the security requirements they can fulfill. In permissionless (also known as public) blockchain platforms, no permission is required to join a network. Therefore, anyone is able to freely join the network and perform read/write operations on the ledger. The most popular or widely known permissionless blockchain is Bitcoin. However, when additional layers of control and privacy are needed, we can consider permissioned blockchain platforms. These platforms require specific permissions prior to the user accessing and performing any read/write operation on the ledger. In other words, permissioned blockchain platforms provide an additional layer of security, where an access control layer is deployed in order to handle permissions for performing some specific operations by authorized participants (Su et al., 2020).
There are a number of popular blockchain platforms (e.g., Ethereum, Hyperledger Fabric, Multichain, Quorum, and Libra), and the options for consumers are growing. Hence, it can be challenging for consumers to determine which platform(s) is/are more appropriate for a given use case without an unbiased evaluation of the platform's key properties and features. Performance is generally a key concern in the adoption of blockchain platforms, but it is generally less studied compared to other concerns such as security (Yli-Huumo et al., 2016; Swan, 2015). This reinforces the importance of unbiased evaluation of popular blockchain platforms’ performance, despite the small number of empirical studies that attempt to quantify and measure performance characteristics of different blockchain platforms under divergent settings. Nonetheless, key differences, significant similarities, and potential opportunities for improvement can be overlooked unless existing empirical performance studies are also critically reviewed and analyzed. This is the focus of this paper.
Specifically, we will analyze, assess, and compare recent empirical studies focused on the performance evaluation of different permissioned blockchain platforms. By doing so, we answer the following research questions.
RQ1: What are the existing empirical studies in the literature focusing on performance evaluation of permissioned blockchain platforms?
Answering RQ1 would help the blockchain community, as well as the broader community, to understand the current state-of-play.
RQ2: What are the key aspects and achievements of the identified empirical studies?
Answering RQ2 would provide the blockchain community, as well as the broader community, a comparative overview of these empirical studies, such as key differences and common performance characteristics of different permissioned blockchain platforms.
RQ3: What are the existing limitations and potential future research opportunities?
Answering RQ3 would provide the blockchain and broader communities’ potential research agenda.
This is the first attempt to conduct a thorough review of the empirical performance evaluation of permissioned blockchain platforms. Findings would potentially benefit business leaders (seeking to adopt a given blockchain platform for a specific application), blockchain developers (seeking to identify and optimize performance issues and bottlenecks of different platforms), and blockchain researchers (seeking to recognize potential opportunities for future enhancements).
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. A literature review on popular consensus algorithms and recent blockchain platforms is given in Section 2. Section 3 presents a detailed review of recent empirical studies focusing on the performance evaluation of permissioned blockchain platforms. Section 4 explains the comparison criteria. Section 5 presents a discussion on the results. Section 6 describes potential future research opportunities, based on the discussion in the preceding section. Finally, conclusions and future work are given in Section 7.
