Though we may “fear the worst”, worrying that unexpectedly bad things will happen to us, there are also times when we “hope for the best”, imagining that unexpectedly good things will happen, too. These contrasting possibilities reflect a fundamental opposition in thinking about the unexpected; namely, that it can be imagined as being unexpectedly good or unexpectedly bad. This paper explores people's reporting of the “unexpected” when they are asked to think about unexpected outcomes to everyday scenarios (such as going shopping, attending lectures, or going on holidays). Specifically, we consider whether people tend to think of the unexpected as mainly good or bad, and what affects the valence of these reported outcomes.
Any adaptive organism, whether human or animal, has to deal with the unexpected to overcome the vagaries of a contingent, and sometimes cruel, world. Accordingly, many psychological studies have explored the unexpected, though often not directly. Typically, studies use a priori definitions of unexpectedness and then examine how this variable impacts other phenomena (Eysenck & Keane, 2015). In studies of human thought, unexpectedness is frequently defined probabilistically (Oaksford, & Chater, N. (Eds.)., 1998) and cast as a key factor in eliciting learning and sense-making (Chater & Loewenstein, 2016; Peeters & Czapinski, 1990; Pezzo, 2003). In attribution research, unexpectedness is defined as actor behaviour that is inconsistent with actor traits, a dichotomy that affects causal thinking (Bohner, Bless, Schwarz, & Strack, 1988; Hastie, 1984; Pyszczynski & Greenberg, 1981; Yopchick & Kim, 2012). In research on surprise, unexpectedness is often operationalized as subjective probabilities and examined as a cause of surprise (Foster & Keane, 2015; Maguire, Maguire, & Keane, 2011; Teigen & Keren, 2003), but none of these studies assess what people understand by the word “unexpected”. Few studies start by asking people to think of unexpected events and then analyse what they actually report. This is what is done here, focusing on the valence of the unexpected outcomes for everyday scenarios.
1.1. Is the unexpected positively or negatively biased?If we ask people to simply think of unexpected events, the valence of the outcome is not specified; that is, the reported “unexpected event” could be “unexpectedly good” or “unexpectedly bad” or, indeed, neither of these.1 For example, if you are told a story about Louise going shopping at her favourite store and drawing money from an ATM (see Table 1) and are asked to think of unexpected outcomes, you could suggest positive or negative events: you could say that “Louise bumped into her best friend” (a positive event) or that “she was robbed” (a negative event). Given the lack of research addressing this specific task, it is unclear whether the unexpected events reported are likely to be positive or negative, or some a mix of both. We do not know whether people will predominantly “fear the worst” or “hope for the best”. However, some hints as to what they might do come from related literatures.Table 1. Two scenarios and the instructional conditions used in experiment 1.Sentence TypeSample ScenariosLouise-ShoppingBob-JobGoalLouise wants to shop at an expensive clothes store.Bob wants to quit his job because he is not credited for his hard work.Additional InformationShe is wearing her favourite dress and matching shoes.On arriving at the office, he turns on his computer and starts working as usual.Plan-StepLouise draws money from the ATM.At coffee-time, Bob goes to talk to his boss about his job.InstructionsUnxpectedThen, something unexpected occurred. What do you think happened?Unexpected-GoodThen, something unexpected and good occurred. What do you think happened?Unexpected-BadThen, something unexpected and bad occurred. What do you think happened?Goal-FailBut Louise does not shop at the expensive clothes store. What do you think happened?But Bob does not quit his job. What do you think happened?One strand of related research suggests that people's responses to the unexpected may be negatively biased, with people “fearing the worse”. It is well-documented that people respond more strongly to negative information and feelings, exhibiting more cognitive and behavioural responses to negative events than their positive counterparts (Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Finkenauer, & Vohs, 2001; Rozin & Royzman, 2001; Tierney & Baumeister, 2019). In the psychology of affect, unexpected events are more often reported as being negative (Taylor, 1991). Reciprocally, negative events can seem more unexpected, diverse, and complex than positive events (Peeters & Czapinski, 1990). Unexpected negative events also elicit stronger physiological responses than unexpected positive events (Hajcak, Holroyd, Moser, & Simons, 2005). Because negative events tend to attract more attention as people try to learn to avoid them in the future (Taylor, 1991), in the long run, it may pay to “fear the worst” rather than “hope for the best”.However, other strands of research suggest that people's responses to future events may be positively biased, that people will generally “hope for the best”. Memory research shows that people's recollection of events can tend towards the positive; often they are more likely to recall positive than negative information, and positive materials are recalled faster than negative materials (Matlin & Stang, 1978). There is often a positivity bias in self-attributions and explanations of one's own behaviour (Mezulis, Abramson, Hyde, & Hankin, 2004). In episodic future thinking, although people often believe that the collective future is negative (Shrikanth, Szpunar, & Szpunar, 2018), they simultaneously believe their own personal future to be generally positive (Shrikanth et al., 2018). Furthermore, in autobiographical memory studies, older adults tend to recall more positive events than negative events from their earlier lives (Singer, Rexhaj, & Baddeley, 2007) and have a preference for attending to positive information over negative information (Carstensen & DeLiema, 2018). As the present task – to generate unexpected events – depends on memory which seems to show a positivity bias, it may well be that people often “hope for the best”.
1.2. The valence of the unexpected as a response to our circumstances?These conflicting literatures do not provide a clear steer on whether unexpected events will be predominantly positive or negative. Indeed, the only thing these literatures agree on, is the valence of the unexpected is inherently either positive or negative. However, these accounts hint at the possibility that the valence of predicted unexpected events may be influenced by the past or current circumstances in which we find ourselves; for instance, that negativity bias may arise because most of the time the situations in which we find ourselves are broadly positive and, as such, the unexpected is negative by contrast. Studies have shown that in wealthy, western societies, most people are likely to experience more good events than bad events in their everyday lives (Schwarz, Kahneman, & Xu, 2009; Tierney & Baumeister, 2019; Kahneman, 2011). Likewise, the words people use most frequently tend to be positive (Boucher & Osgood, 1969; Rozin, Berman, & Royzman, 2010). This research suggests that unexpected events may be negative because they are assumed to be the opposite of, typically positive, expected events; that expected events are “normal”, frequent, and positive by contrast to unexpected events that are “abnormal”, infrequent, and negative. So, people may be valence-countering, the unexpected is assumed to be negative to counter the typically positive circumstances in which they find themselves.Interestingly, this proposal also predicts that there may well be some situations in which positive, unexpected events will be reported, as a counter to negative circumstances in which people find themselves. The literature on counterfactual thinking provides examples of this negative-to-positive countering. When people think counterfactually about negative factual events (e.g., someone being in a traffic accident), they tend to spontaneously think of positive counterfactuals (e.g., “if only the driver had swerved to avoid the crash”; Byrne, 2007, Byrne, 2016; Byrne & McEleney, 2000; Kahneman & Tversky, 1982; Roese, 1997). However, this literature does not show that positive factual events elicit negative counterfactuals, as people prefer to undo negative outcomes much more than positive ones (e.g., scientists rarely say, “If only I hadn't won that Nobel Prize”). Also, this counterfactual task may not be a good guide to how people imagine the unexpected. However, it does suggest that a negativity bias in the unexpected could be mitigated by valence-countering that results in positive unexpected events, when the current circumstances be negative. This latter possibility emerged in the course of the two experiments reported here (Experiments 1 and 2) leading to a direct test of the valence-countering hypothesis in Experiment 3.
1.3. A theory of unexpected event generationOur theory of unexpected event generation draws on these literatures and on other diverse proposals. Theories of narrative comprehension propose that people understand events by building and maintaining a situation model of unfolding scenarios (Graesser & McNamara, 2011). This situation model establishes expectations/predictions at multiple levels of analysis about what will occur next in a given situation; for example, one might have expectations about what physically will occur next (e.g., if ball is dropped, it bounces) or about the actions of actors (e.g., if Louise is hungry, she is expected to eat). These expectations presumably come from schematic structures in memory learned from direct or vicarious experience with these situations (such as, “scripts”; Schank & Abelson, 1975). When people attempt to think of the unexpected they must use this situation model to access information about less expected outcomes, outcomes may take the form of known disruptions to their plans or failures of their goals. In Artificial Intelligence, David Leake has proposed that people learn to deal with the world by encoding such disruptions/failures in everyday plans-goals in schematic structures, called explanation patterns (Leake, 1992, Leake, 1993; Schank, 1986). Explanation patterns are “script-like” structures that provide pre-canned explanations for common disruptions and failures in everyday plans. The literature on negative bias reports that people allocate more attention and causal reasoning in order to avoid negative outcomes or goal failures; so, much of the cognitive effort expended on building explanation patterns is directed towards preparing for negative outcomes.So, in this account, a shopping-schema would encode shopping-goals and typical plan steps to achieve those goals (e.g., get money, visit shop, choose product, pay for product), but would also encode common disruptions to these plan-steps and sources of failure that blocked these goals in the past; negative disruptions such as “losing one's money”, “the shop being shut” or “being mugged on the way to the shop”. As our everyday plans tend to record more positive events, most unexpected disruptions/plan-failures to the normal course of these events will tend to be negative. In short, this theory predicts that a negativity bias will be observed, that unexpected events will tend to be negative. It also predicts that these unexpected events will be known disruptions, unexpected events that actually quite mundane and predictable, rather than highly unpredictable unexpected outcomes (e.g., “losing one's money” rather than “the ATM being a portal to another dimension”).2
1.4. The present studiesHere, three experiments on people's everyday understanding of the unexpected are reported, with an emphasis on the valence of these events. Experiment 1 aims to determine what people understand by the “unexpected”. Given that the unexpected events reported in Experiment 1 were often quite mundane and predictable, Experiment 2 was designed to elicit more “bizarre” unexpected events, to see if this instructional change impacted the valence of reported events. As Experiments 1 and 2 did not explicitly control the a priori valence of the presented scenarios, Experiment 3 used a matched-materials design to explicitly manipulate a given scenario's valence (positive or negative) to specifically test whether any form of valence-countering occurs.
