Shape similarity is a well-studied, fundamental problem in geometry processing. Its importance stems from the necessity of establishing comparative surface metrics to drive a variety of mesh processing algorithms, such as edit propagation, attribute transfer, search, correspondence, and segmentation [2]. Many similarity approaches are based on computing and comparing point-wise shape “signatures” or feature descriptors. These signatures may be based on intrinsic or extrinsic properties on the mesh. Over the last decade, a popular vein of signatures emerged which offer a multi-scale view of the meshes they are defined upon, commonly through some scale-parameterizable approximation of a physical phenomenon. Many of these signatures involve the spectrum of the Laplace–Beltrami operator [3], [4]. Once proposed, it is often left to future work to create a framework to best leverage the specific properties of each class of these signatures.Download : Download high-res image (286KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. Our Smooth Shape Diameter Signature (SSDS) visualized on the sea monster model  [1].
Often overlooked is how these shape signatures can be interactively controlled for applications such as mesh segmentation and edit transfer at application-appropriate scales. Often, the scale best suited to a user’s desired correspondence cannot be automatically determined. This is due to either an algorithm’s inability to guess the scale at which the user is intending to edit or to underlying deficiencies in the automatic similarity metric (e.g., semantic information is not present in the geometry).Download : Download high-res image (364KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. An illustration of geometry propagation using our curve propagation: (Left to right) (1) A single ring is drawn on a finger of the hand; (2) Additional ring placements are suggested; (3) The ring placements are exported to Blender; (4) Complex geometry (ring pops) are placed and aligned according to the exported curves (manually, as an illustrative application).
In this work, we focus on the interactive design of self-similarity maps, or finding self-similar regions on a single manifold mesh. We base our self-similarity maps on multi-scale shape signatures that define a scale-parameterized signature value at each vertex, thereby capturing local information when desirable or neglecting their contribution when not. We investigate two operations, propagating selected surface regions and hand drawn surface curves.
Our contributions are:

•An approach to allow users to interactively obtain desired self-similarity maps by automatically finding scale parameters and signature thresholds—and modifying the underlying shape signature when necessary. Our interactive step is intuitive since the user merely labels areas they consider similar and, optionally, dissimilar. We provide immediate visual feedback, so the user can provide minimal input, stopping when satisfied with the displayed result. Exception perturbations are employed to successfully establish thresholds even when there is no scale which brings user labeling into agreement. These established relationships between mesh regions are made part of any subsequent shape signature query, including generating other similarity maps on the same mesh.•The Smooth Shape Diameter Signature (SSDS). While our approach for choosing shape signature thresholds is agnostic to a large class of shape signatures, the spectral signatures available in the literature have prohibitive computational requirements. We propose a signature based on smoothing the Shape Diameter Function [5] as an alternative informative similarity metric with significantly better time complexity.•A method for self-similar curve propagation based on tangent-space curve unrolling for distortion-free surface parameterization.
We show the effectiveness of our method in a set of edit propagation and detail synthesis routines.
