The global energy and climate agenda has been progressing fast, going through different stages and co-evolved with scientific advancements [1], as stocktaken in the assessments of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). It has also been through significant challenges, including among others the recent rise to power of narratives that have been hostile towards energy transitions and climate action [2] and to some extent impeding international efforts; or the COVID-19 global health emergency [3] and associated recovery efforts looming large over policy prioritisation [4].
Nonetheless, the European Union (EU) has consistently taken a leading role in international climate policy [5] throughout, adopting relevant strategies in as early as 1992, and currently pushing forward an ambitious Green Deal to achieve climate neutrality by 2050 [6]. But, despite its ambition and current success in achieving most 2020 goals, the EU is not on easy track to meet its 2030 climate and energy targets [7]. This diverging trajectory is frequently attributed to governance issues [8] and challenges of monitoring nature [9]: the submission of a collective, supranational set of Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) at the EU level requires that collective targets be appropriately disaggregated at the national level, as well as that Member States live up to their national commitments and that the Community successfully monitor progress made at both scales. So far, strong discrepancies have been observed among Member States [10]. These inter alia include renewable support schemes, bottlenecks in transmission lines, societal resistance levels, fossil fuel lock-ins, progress in energy efficiency, and prioritisation of the climate agenda, as well as misalignment of National Energy and Climate Plans (NECPs) with collective targets, as reflected in the EU action pledges to the UNFCCC. European capacity to explore the envisaged pathways to achieve its near- and long-term climate and energy objectives, therefore, needs to be significantly enhanced.
In this perspective, we briefly discuss how this capacity is supported by models, and how international modelling teams are organised within dedicated consortia and coordinate multi-model analyses to provide robust scientific evidence. We note the lack of such a structured communication channel for the diverse and highly active, yet currently fragmented, European modelling landscape and review the necessary steps to delivering comprehensive and comprehensible modelling exercises. We highlight the importance of transparency of modelling capabilities and processes, harmonisation of modelling (socioeconomic, technoeconomic, emission, and policy) parameters, full disclosure of input and output datasets, interlinkages among models of different geographic granularity, as well as employment of models that transcend the highly harmonised group of IAMs, in model inter-comparison exercises. Finally, drawing from the COVID-19 pandemic, we discuss the need to expand the modelling comfort zone, by exploring extreme scenarios, disruptive innovations, and questions across the sustainability spectrum. Progress on all these fronts will ensure that modelling is established as a critically useful tool to support the complexities of policy and decisions around rapid decarbonisation of Europe in the coming years.
