Lensless imaging systems have recently gained wide popularity because they are portable, cost-effective, and lightweight, with numerous applications in the fields of biosensing, point-of-care diagnostics, and cytometry [1,2]. One of the key advantages of lensless imaging is the wide field of view [3,4]. However, the lack of a lens imposes limitations. Typically, a computational analysis program is used to enhance, substitute, and compensate for the lack of a lens and to add various features such as counting and detection. To improve resolution, Bishara et al. used multiple fiber-optic waveguides that are butt-coupled to light-emitting diodes. The light-emitting diodes are controlled by a low-cost micro-controller to illuminate the sample in a time-varying sequence, producing lens-free holograms. The resulting holograms are then captured by a digital sensor array and are processed using a fast super-resolution algorithm to generate high resolution holographic images (phase and amplitude) of the objects. This system showed good imaging performance but is complex.
Lensless imaging systems use integrated circuits that act as an imaging device, typically a charge-coupled device (CCD) or a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) pixel array. An alternate system is a scanning microscope that combines various small images into one large composite image, but our focus is on point-of-care systems that do not have such capabilities. The continuing improvements in the field of semiconductors have greatly enhanced the features of CMOS sensors used in cell phone cameras, with tremendous improvements over the last few years. The pixels size has shrunk while the number of pixels has grown. This continued improvement will enhance lensless systems and lens-based systems. A smaller pixel size provides a higher definition and allows for digital magnification, while a larger number of pixels will yield a wider field of view [5].
In this paper, we describe two imaging systems, i.e., the lensless and lens-based systems, and compare their performance using various imaging standards. Lab quality optics were used to demonstrate the principles, but a portable, low-cost product can easily be designed for mass production using the same principles. The main contribution of this work is the performance comparison of purposely designed and fabricated lens-based and lensless systems with the exactly same field of view. This is for the first time to the best of our knowledge.
We begin with a theoretical analysis of the two systems. It is important to note that different sets of equations are used to describe the system depending on whether the imaging subject is in the near or far-field. Our systems operate in the far-field of a plane wave due to the properties of our design.
A lensless system is designed and built, which allows a variable, near monochromatic plane wave to be generated with an illuminating source (Light Emitting Diode, LED). The light source can be easily changed to have different wavelengths. A three-dimensional x, y and z fixture is constructed to have distinct features like:
1)To ensure good contact to the module's surface,2)To enable visual movement along the entire channel,3)To increase the field of view.
The distance through the module to the imaging device effectively magnifies the image diffraction pattern by a factor of 10 to 20X.
Wide area imaging is also beneficial to lens-based systems. Werley et al. designed a wide view microscope “Firefly” based on the Olympus MVPLAPO XC, an objective lens with a numerical aperture (NA) of 0.5 and a magnification of 2x [6]. This allowed them to observe 100 neurons in parallel with blue light while reading fluorescent voltage readings. The Firefly microscope is sophisticated and uses fluorescent sensors and optogenetic actuators.
To provide a fair comparison, we designed a lens-based system to have the same field of view as that of a lensless system. A compound lens system design was found necessary to get the equivalent field of view. The novel new compound lens-based system design is one of the major contributions of this work. The working distance to the slide is about 50 mm. For the same field of view, a 1X magnification was used. Increased magnification of this system is explored. To compare the two systems, the same type of imaging camera is used. The comparison images are composed of both optical standards and biological subjects. The results are shown as direct image comparisons.
