Fatigue damage is a major source of failures in mechanical structures; the main factors, which induce such failures, include: a large number of applied stress cycles, maximum tensile stress, and fluctuations in the applied stress. In general, the maximum stress accrues from discontinuities in both external surfaces (e.g., notches and fillets) and internal microstructures (e.g., inclusions and voids). These defects are often produced during the manufacturing process, and they are randomly distributed in polycrystalline alloy (e.g., metallic) structures.
Fatigue damage in ductile materials (e.g., polycrystalline alloys) can be classified into three consecutive stages [1]. The first stage is the crack initiation, where the actual crack growth rate may not be significant (e.g., ~1nm per cycle); therefore, the fatigue damage risk is low. The second stage is the crack propagation, and it starts after the first stage and propagates in a direction approximately normal to the applied load. Here, the crack growth rate is low at the beginning and becomes high at the end of the stage. Thus, the fatigue damage risk is considered to be low at the beginning and gradually becomes high at the end of the stage. The third stage is defined when the crack becomes sufficiently long, where the remaining cross-section area othe stressed component may not be able to sustain the applied load, and the fatigue damage risk is very high [2], [1], [3].
Damage estimation in mechanical structures belongs to the class of engineering maintenance. Two approaches provide damage measurements in metallic structures. The first approach is to identify the maximum applied load that would prevent the structure from failing immediately, where the crack geometry (e.g., length, location, and orientation) is known in addition to boundary conditions. The second approach is to determine the maximum length of a crack that would not cause the structure to fail immediately. The second approach is defined as damage tolerance. From the perspectives of damage tolerance, once a crack length is determined, the damaged component must be periodically inspected with appropriate non-destructive testing (NDT). However, when a crack length becomes critical, the structural part must be fixed or replaced where further crack growth could cause catastrophic failure of the fatigued component [4].
This paper defines the damage tolerance based on the crack tip opening displacement (CTOD) δ, instead of the crack length (CL) a. Fig. 1 shows how CTOD is dependent on CL that increases with expanding CTOD. Therefore, in this paper, CTOD has been used as the source of information for determining the damage risk of the fatigued component [5].Download : Download high-res image (39KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 1. The location of the investigated area, the crack tip opening displacement (CTOD) δ, and the crack length (CL) a.
In this paper, the defined damage risk of the fatigued component may belong to two classes. The first class is the non-risk class, where the component surface is apparently crack-free, as shown in Fig. 2a. The second class is the risk class, and it is divided into two subclasses. Fig. 2b represents the first subclass, which is the low-risk damage class. The crack growth rate in the low-risk class is slow, and the crack tip opening displacement is small. Furthermore, the shape of the cracked surface, after the failure of a fatigued component, is a noticeable “thumbnail,” as illustrated in Fig. 3. The second subclass is defined as high-risk damage class, where the crack growth rate is high and the crack opening size is significant, as shown in Fig. 2c. The region of high-risk damage starts after “thumbnail” as illustrated in Fig. 3 [5]Download : Download high-res image (43KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 2. (a) Crack free surface, (b) small-crack, and (c) large crack.Download : Download high-res image (16KB)Download : Download full-size imageFig. 3. Low risk region (thumbnail), and high-risk region.
According to some investigators (e.g., [6]), more than two-thirds of all inspections in aviation industry are essentially made by visual inspection. Although the visual inspection is capable of detecting a variety of defects (e.g., fatigue cracks) in machinery components, damage detection accuracy may vary from person to person, depending on the vision of the inspector, in addition to various other factors, such as poor access, lighting, geometry, and size of the area being inspected. Furthermore, determining the damage-risk of the fatigued component depends on the inspector’s experience; in most of the cases, it is a time-consuming task. Thus, automated crack detection is deemed very necessary.
Recently, much research on image-based algorithms has been reported around the theme of crack detection [7], [8], [9]. From these perspective, tools of digital image processing (e.g., edge detection and thresholding) are capable of crack detection in images, where the properties of crack images are analyzed based on photometric and geometric hypotheses [10]. For example, the location of a crack can be defined based on the photometric property, where crack pixels have distinct values from other pixels. Thus, a threshold value can be defined to separate cracks from the background [10], [11], [12]. One of the major disadvantages of these methods is that the noise on the image could affect the accuracy of crack detection. To overcome this problem, mathematically techniques (e.g., discrete wavelet transforms) are used to remove noise from the images. The discrete wavelet transform can distinguish between crack regions and crack free regions based on their scales, where scales of the crack regions be different from those of crack-free regions [13]. Although the above-mentioned techniques can detect cracks on material structure, they do not have the capability to classify crack images.
Recent years have witnessed a growing academic interest in detecting fatigue cracks using machine learning methods [7]. In addition to the capability of crack detection, the machine learning methods are able to classify the images to their proper classes. Some investigations have proved that machine learning methods are able to classify non-crack images and crack images, and the performance of these methods was excellent, their accuracy exceeded 90% [14]. However, most of these investigations have not used the image pixel data directly for classification, nor they have classified the crack images into further sub-classes. For example, one study used the histogram of the image as the input data for classification instead of the original image pixels data [14]. Another study used a convolutional neural network (CNN) to detect the crack based on the classification of the image, which means that this study has only two classes, crack-free images and cracked images [10]. Along this line, this paper proposes the concept of CNN to classify the status of fatigued surfaces into their proper classes by using image features.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) belong to a special class of artificial neural networks that are used for object detection and classification in images [15], [16]. They are also referred to as deep neural networks due to the presence of a large number of hidden layers. Therefore, a CNN can be viewed as a deep learning network that takes an input image and classifies the image into a particular class. In any artificial neural network, layers are made up of a fundamental unit called the neuron. A neuron in a CNN is simply a kernel, or in other words a filter with which the input image is going to be convolved with. These kernels are stacked in a cascaded way to form a layer called the convolutional layer. Multiple such layers form a deep network. Since the input image is convolved with the filters to produce feature maps, such a network is called a Convolutional Neural Network. It is noted that CNNs are capable of classifying a large number of classes [16], and they may also be very efficient for image recognition [17], [18]. Owing to the high performance of CNNs, there are now being used not only for image classification, but also for object detection. Apparently Girshick et al. [19] first proposed the use of CNNs for object detection within images. Later, efficient and fast performing models for visual object detection were developed [20], [21], [22]; CNNs are also capable of sub-pixel accurate segmentation of objects [23].
In this paper, all images have been generated using an optical metrology device. A major concern here is the low number of images, where operations of deep convolutional neural networks have to be performed well on a big data set by alleviating the problem of overfitting. Image augmentation is a possible solution to this problem, where the generated images need to be augmented by applying image processing techniques such as image translation, image rotation, image scaling, and image reflection [24]. The total of 255 images have been selected from those that were generated by an optical metrology device (Alicona). These images are then split into a training set and a testing set. Moreover, a part of the training set is further split into two subsets, i.e., training subset and cross-validation subset. The training set is used to generate parameters to build a problem model. In contrast, the cross-validation subset is used to evaluate the performance of the developed model from the training subset; thus, the entire learning phase consists of these two subsets. When the learning phase is finalized, the test set is used to compute the accuracy of the learning phase. Data from several studies suggest that the distribution for limited data should be as follows: 60% of the available data for training; 20% for cross-validation set; and the remaining 20% is for testing [25].
The novelty of the paper includes: (i) development of an autonomous method for detection and classification of fatigue crack damage in polycrystalline alloy structures (e.g., machinery components); and (ii) experimental validation of the associated risk assessment algorithms that are applicable to remaining life prediction in various types of machinery. Although the underlying algorithms are validated on a test apparatus for a polycrystalline alloy, which is a ductile material (in the room temperature), they are expected to be functional for other types of materials (e.g., brittle) when trained with appropriate data sets with the same or a similar CNN architecture. This is suggested as topic of future research in Section 5.
From the above perspectives, the main contributions of the work reported in this paper with respect to those in the existing literature are delineated below.
1.Damage classification: The damage tolerance of a fatigued component is classified using convolutional neural networks (CNNs) into three categories, namely, non-risk, low-risk, and high-risk.2.Data augmentation: The ensemble of original input data is augmented using digital image processing methods such as translation, rotation, and reflection.3.Model performance evaluation: The performance of the CNN model is evaluated using the Soft-Max algorithm and loss function.
The paper is organized into five sections including the present section. Section 2 describes the methodology adopted in thsi paper, including the information on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) that form the backbone of the work presented in this paper; this section consists of the following three subsections: descriptions of CNN methodologies; concepts of CNN architectures; and demonstration of data bank augmentation. Section 3 describes the experimental procedure on a test apparatus and the associated instrumentation. Section 4 discusses how the proposed CNN architecture evaluates test images and illustrates the accuracy of the proposed CNN architecture. Section 5 summarizes and concludes the paper with recommendations for future research.
