Increasing anthropogenic effects on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean feature prominently in scientific scenarios that seek to communicate climate change consequences. From the melting of ice sheets to the introduction of invasive non-native species and abrupt changes to marine and terrestrial polar ecosystems, the Antarctic region is at a critical stage upon which climate futures are anticipated, modelled and projected upon diverse public audiences. Simulations can be thought here as acts that are, in Judith Butler (1988) term, “performative”, intending to make real worlds precisely through the production of imagined ones. Such projections are exhibited across literary (see Leane, 2012), political (see Dodds, 2010), legal (see French & Scott, 2009), scientific (see O’Reilly, 2017), and touristic (see Hall & Saarinen, 2010; Tin, Liggett, Maher, & Lamers, 2013) fields and media.
As Hamilton (2015) argues, however, public recognition of the relevance of polar regions for the survival of planetary life remains low. Kahan et al. (2012) further suggest that communicating climate change depends upon more than the quality of science and the clarity of its communication. Factors such as avoidance of cognitive dissonance and peer or community identification can make beliefs resistant to contrary evidence even among individuals with high science literacy. Utilising but moving beyond interactive representations of science, made possible through techniques such as computational simulations for example, scientists and educators need new ways to inform and engage the public in practices of climate change citizen science (Groulx, Brisbois, Lemieux, Winegardner, & Fishback, 2017) through the articulation of “strategic narrative[s]” (Hajer & Pelzer, 2018).
In this article we develop an exploratory account of one of these experimental methods, based on our experience developing a serious game based on environmental change simulations through a dialogical engagement with a specific and interested ‘public’. The game was co-designed over an 18-month period (2017-2018) with 18−30 year old participants from three cities—Christchurch in New Zealand, Hobart in Australia, and Punta Arenas in Chile—as part of a larger collaboration designed to foster a sense of custodianship toward the Antarctic region. Alongside Cape Town (South Africa) and Ushuaia (Argentina), these cities make up the five internationally recognised Antarctic ‘gateway cities’. Antarctic scientists, tourists, policymakers, and commodities travel through these port towns, which in turn have developed specific urban responses to this geographically privileged relationship (Dodds, 1997). These responses are often spatial in form: research centres, logistic infrastructure, cultural festivals, museums, and tourist facilities are examples of the physical locations in which Antarctic connections can be experienced in these cities (see Roldan, 2011).
The aim of the online game—called Antarctic Futures—was to elicit a debate among urban youth about the role that Antarctic gateway cities do or may in future play in relation to the Antarctic in an era of global environmental change, by translating scenario-based futures into a playable experience. From its design to its eventual outcome as a software product, the process of game-building becomes, in our account here, itself both object of inquiry (Savage, 2013) and critique of the limits of reductionist methods of future-making (Pink & Salazar, 2017).
Such critique follows a long tradition of concern about the limits of scientific discourse. Discussing how climate models gain epistemic authority, Mike Hulme (2011); 2012) has argued, for example, that a new climate reductionism is observable in the hegemony exercised by the predictive natural sciences over contingent, imaginative and humanistic accounts of social life and visions of the future. Granjou, Walker, and Salazar (2017)) have further engaged with the modalities through which environmental futures—as contingent sets of probabilities and possibilities—are made present and decided upon, problematizing the ways in which emergent threatening futures are known, anticipated, fostered, preempted, and prepared for (Granjou et al., 2017). As Adam and Groves (2007) also argue, futures are not merely imagined, but also made, told, traded, tamed, transformed and traversed through uneven approaches to the future which they frame as doing, knowing and caring. Scenarios concern not only knowledge claims, but their translation to domains of action and ethics.
Rather than seek to critique how anticipatory techniques of scenario-building in the sciences are used and performed, our approach has addressed—through participatory game design—Antarctic futures as experimental sites of engagement. As we argue in the following sections, the game that we co-designed is illustrative of how expectations are linked to mobilisation as a way of enacting future users (Wilkie & Michael, 2009). Our arguments centre on how, necessitated by the distance between Antarctic cities and the commensurate difficulties of working with participants remotely, these links were established for us, as facilitators, developers and scholars. In other words, our contribution is less about the impact of co-design on workshop participants – though we acknowledge these as they emerge – and more about its effect on our work, during and beyond the storyboarding and design phases documented here. Our concern is also with imagining alternative and preferred futures, and with how these are preempted, prefigured, and prepared for (Anderson 2010), or forged, negotiated, contested, colonised and tamed (Felt, 2011). Building upon Hajer & Pelzer’s (2018) further distinction between“ expected future” and “desirable futures”, deployed to characterise collaborative scenario development, we employ here the term ‘playful futures’ to describe how desires of co-design participants can be expressed, in creative contexts.
The three workshops, conducted between September 2017 and August 2018, functioned as design sessions that sought active participation by urban youth in the game’s ideation and construction. These events themselves mediated—at times in complex and confusing ways—the multiple expertise of academic researchers, game designers, institutional staff and young people themselves. By detailing these processual co-design activities, we seek not only to un-‘black-box’ serious game development, but to show how the process opened up alternative conjectures, simulations, narratives and modes of gameplay that for various reasons ended up on the cutting room floor rather than in the final product. Produced by young adult participants, these hidden paths that did not materialise in code nevertheless performed work: enacting a form of citizen science and registering protest even toward the sympathetic institutions orchestrating the workshops.
The focus of this paper is therefore on our experience in developing the game through a participatory process. Drawing on the findings and insights of these three workshops, we show how the processes just as much as the outputs of game design became, for us researchers involved, “boundary objects” that straddle the domains of scientific scenarios and public engagement (Star & Griesemer, 1989). Far from seamless, we also illustrate how these translations are fraught with other unexpected modes of engagement that were activated by the political materiality of the game development.
Combining participatory design and participant observation, detailed in the methodology section below, our findings have two key implications for efforts to connect climate change science to localised geographies of public engagement. First, regardless of its final form— an academic paper, digital game, film or fiction—the translation of climate change scenarios can be a terrain of collaboration between experts and other groups, through material objects that produce vital encounters between otherwise divergent social worlds. Second, these practices of translation may involve multiple, generative forms of imagination that do not necessarily filter down to the final output (in this case, the design of the game) but are still productive ‘dead-ends’ that can be deployed by researchers to explore the limits of scientific engagement.
This paper seeks to contribute to current epistemological debates about experimental, or what Lury and Wakeford (2012) call “inventive methods”, and their role in ecologies of scientific engagement (for extensive reviews, see for example Rocheleau & Roth, 2007 or Birkenholtz, 2011). We begin section 2 with a short discussion of the long-standing relationship between scientific simulations, anticipatory scenarios and the ways in which Antarctic futures have traditionally been engaged by the scientific community. We then bring this concern into dialogue with the existing literature on serious games, highlighting how this scholarship has mainly focused on the design outcomes rather than the process of scenario-building and co-designing of interfaces and gameplay that inventively bridge the gap between science and its sites of public engagement. After a short discussion of methods, we detail the three workshops, describing their respective outcomes and by-product discussions. We conclude with a reflection on the role of serious games in mobilising the politics of anticipatory science.
