The IMPC/KOMP program provides the opportunity to screen mice harboring well defined gene-inactivation mutations in a uniform genetic background. The program performs a global tissue phenotyping survey that includes skeletal x-rays and bone density measurements. Because of the relative insensitivity of the two screening tests for detecting variance in bone architecture, we initiated a secondary screen based on μCT and a cryohistolomorphological workflow that was performed on the femur and vertebral compartments on 220 randomly selected knockouts (KOs) and 36 control bone samples over a 2 1/2 year collection period provided by one of the production/phenotyping centers. The performance of the screening protocol was designed to balance throughput and cost versus sensitivity and informativeness such that the output would be of value to the skeletal biology community. Here we report the reliability of this screening protocol to establish criteria for control skeletal variance at the architectural, dynamic and cellular histomorphometric level. Unexpected properties of the control population include unusually high variance in BV/TV in male femurs and greater bone formation and bone turnover rates in the female femur and vertebral trabeculae bone compartments. However, the manner for maintaining bone formation differed between these two bone sites. The vertebral compartment relies on maintaining a greater number of bone forming surfaces while the femoral compartment utilized more matrix production per cell. The comparison of the architectural properties obtained by μCT and histomorphology revealed significant differences in values for BV/TV, Tb.Th and Tb.N which is attributable to sampling density of the two methods. However, as a screening tool, expressing the ratio of KO to the control line as obtained by either method was remarkably similar. It identified KOs with significant variance which led to a more detailed histological analysis. Our findings are exemplified by the Efna4 KO, in which a high BV/TV was identified by μCT and confirmed by histomorphometry in the femur but not in the vertebral compartment. Dynamic labeling showed a marked increase in BFR which was attributable to increased labeling surfaces. Cellular analysis confirmed partitioning of osteoblast to labeling surfaces and a marked decrease in osteoclastic activity on both labeling and quiescent surfaces. This pattern of increased bone modeling would not be expected based on prior studies of the Ephrin-Ephrin receptor signaling pathways between osteoblasts and osteoclasts. Overall, our findings underscore why unbiased screening is needed because it can reveal unknown or unanticipated genes that impact skeletal variation.
