Dairy calves are often offered milk allowance at a flat rate during the first 6 wk of life, although an initial high allowance followed by a stepwise reduction (step-down strategy) may correspond better to the calves' nutritional needs. The amount of milk offered per feeding is typically constant. However, during natural suckling, the daily number of milk meals (suckling frequency) declines with age, which may reflect increased consumption of solid feeds. Thus, allowing calves to pattern their meals on a computer-controlled feeder by placing less restriction on meal frequency may stimulate dairy calves' ingestion of solid feeds. This experiment investigated the effects of milk feeding strategy and milk feeding frequency on calves' feeding behavior, intake, and growth. Sixty-four male Holstein Friesian calves, purchased from conventional dairy farms, were housed in groups of 8 and fed milk replacer (MR) via computer-controlled milk feeders. From 14 d old, calves were assigned to either a conventional flat-rate milk allowance (CON: 6.5 L/d of MR from d 14 to 42; 4 L/d from d 43 to 49; 2 L/d from d 50 to 56 of age) or to stepwise reduction in milk allowance (STEP: 8 L/d of MR from d 14 to 28; 5 L/d from d 29 to 42; 4 L/d from d 43 to 49; 2 L/d from d 50 to 56 of age). Within each group of 8, 4 calves were randomly allocated to each of 2 milk feeding frequencies, either restricted portion size (RES: maximum milk portion size of 2.3 L/portion) or unrestricted portion size (UNRES). Concentrates, hay, and water were available ad libitum. Feeding behavior was recorded via video for 24 h on 26 and 40 d of age. On d 26, where STEP calves were offered 1.5 L/d more milk than CON calves, no difference was seen regarding the time spent eating concentrate (16.9 vs. 20.3 min/d). However, STEP calves spent more time eating concentrate on d 40, where these calves had 1.5 L/d less milk than CON (36.1 vs. 27.2 min/d). Thus, a lower daily milk allowance stimulated feeding on concentrate d 40, but not d 26. As predicted, UNRES calves spent more time eating concentrate (27.6 vs. 21.9 min/d) and more time eating hay (38.4 vs. 30.0 min/d) than RES calves. However, higher appetite for solid feeds by UNRES calves may not be explained by milk intake per se. Rather, this is likely due to their opportunity to have larger milk meals, which appeared to increase their appetite for milk (as indicated by longer time spent in the milk feeder; 64.0 vs. 48.8 min/d) as well as for solid feeds. Among CON calves, the UNRES treatment resulted in higher ADG 2 wk postweaning, but not among STEP calves. These findings partially support that relaxing restriction on milk portions helps calves to transition from milk to solid feeds before weaning off milk. However, more research is needed to determine how restriction on milk portions interacts with milk feeding strategy when a higher total milk allowance is offered.
