High-resolution separated local field (SLF) experiments are employed in oriented-sample solid state NMR to measure angular-dependent heteronuclear dipolar couplings for structure determination. While traditionally these experiments have been designed analytically by determining cycles of pulses with specific phases and durations to achieve cancellation of the homonuclear dipolar terms in the average Hamiltonian, recent work has introduced a computational approach to optimizing linewidths of the 1H-15N dipolar resonances. Accelerated by GPU processors, a computer algorithm searches for the optimal parameters by simulating numerous 1H-15N NMR spectra. This approach, termed ROULETTE, showed promising results by developing a new pulse sequence (ROULETTE-1.0) exhibiting 18% sharper mean linewidths than SAMPI4 for an N-acetyl Leucine (NAL) crystal. Herein, we expand on this previous work to improve the performance of the 1H-15N SLF experiment and extend the work beyond the original approach to new SLF experiments. The new algorithm, in addition to finding pulse durations and phases, now searches for the optimal on/off application scheme of radio frequency irradiation on each channel. This constitutes true de novo optimization, effectively optimizing every aspect of a pulse sequence instead of just phases and durations. With an improved ROULETTE algorithm, we have found a new 1H-15N pulse sequence, termed ROULETTE-2.0, yielding 32% sharper mean linewidths than SAMPI4 for NAL crystal at 500 MHz 1H frequency. Whereas both SAMPI4 and ROULETTE-1.0 have a window where the rf power on the I-channel is turned off, the new pulse sequence is entirely windowless. Furthermore, the reliability of the algorithm has been greatly improved in terms of avoiding false positives, i.e. well-performing pulse sequences in silica that fail to render narrow resonances in experiment. The program has been extended to the 13Cα-1Hα SLF experiments, using a 6 subdwell architecture similar to the 1H-15N optimization. Compared to the PISEMA pulse sequence, the mean 13Cα-1Hα linewidth is 17% sharper for the new pulse sequence, termed ROULETTE-CAHA. In addition to superior performance, the work demonstrates the broad applicability of the algorithm and its adaptability to different NMR experiments and spin systems.
