Artificial intelligence (AI), specifically deep learning, offers the potential to enhance the field of GI endoscopy in areas ranging from lesion detection and classification to quality metrics and documentation. Progress in this field will be measured by whether AI implementation can lead to improved patient outcomes and more efficient clinical workflow for GI endoscopists. The aims of this article are to report the findings of a multidisciplinary group of experts focusing on issues in AI research and applications related to gastroenterology and endoscopy, to review the current status of the field, and to produce recommendations for investigators developing and studying new AI technologies for gastroenterology.
A multidisciplinary meeting was held on September 28, 2019, bringing together academic, industry, and regulatory experts in diverse fields including gastroenterology, computer and imaging sciences, machine learning, computer vision, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, and the National Institutes of Health. Recent and ongoing studies in gastroenterology and current technology in AI were presented and discussed, key gaps in knowledge were identified, and recommendations were made for research that would have the highest impact in making advances and implementation in the field of AI to gastroenterology.
There was a consensus that AI will transform the field of gastroenterology, particularly endoscopy and image interpretation. Powered by advanced machine learning algorithms, the use of computer vision in endoscopy has the potential to result in better prediction and treatment outcomes for patients with gastroenterology disorders and cancer. Large libraries of endoscopic images, “EndoNet,” will be important to facilitate development and application of AI systems. The regulatory environment for implementation of AI systems is evolving, but common outcomes such as colon polyp detection have been highlighted as potential clinical trial endpoints. Other threshold outcomes will be important, as well as clarity on iterative improvement of clinical systems.
Gastroenterology is a prime candidate for early adoption of AI. AI is rapidly moving from an experimental phase to a clinical implementation phase in gastroenterology. It is anticipated that the implementation of AI in gastroenterology over the next decade will have a significant and positive impact on patient care and clinical workflows. Ongoing collaboration among gastroenterologists, industry experts, and regulatory agencies will be important to ensure that progress is rapid and clinically meaningful. However, several constraints and areas will benefit from further exploration, including potential clinical applications, implementation, structure and governance, role of gastroenterologists, and potential impact of AI in gastroenterology.
