Digital resources can be implemented to support the quality of education, including for teachers teaching science. Studies have explored technology integration for schools in cities and urban areas; however, few studies focused on the technology integration in education of rural areas. Therefore, this study aimed at elaborating factors predicting Indonesian science teachers' integration of digital resources in education, especially for teaching activities in rural areas. Besides, demographic information was addressed to understand the differences regarding the integration of digital resources in education. We collected data from 217 respondents who are science teachers of senior and junior high schools in one province located in Sumatra, Indonesia. Using Smart PLS 3.0, we analyzed the data to understand the relationship between exogenous and endogenous variables. In addition, t-test was used to elaborate on the differences regarding the integration of digital resources based on demographic information. Findings from the path analysis show that attitude was the strongest driver predicting intention to use digital resources in education perceived by teachers in rural areas. Meanwhile, self-efficacy was reported to be insignificant for the intention to use. The only predictor that is positively significant for actual behavior was intention to use. Other factors (facilitating condition and knowledge and skills) did not affect actual behavior. In addition, the difference test informed that Mean values between participants’ teaching experience was significantly different regarding the integration of digital resources of schools in rural areas. No significant differences were reported based on gender and level of school. The technology integration for schools in rural areas is different compared to the schools in cities and urban areas. With limited accesses and resources, this study might provide practical implications and recommendations for further research, especially on technology integration in schools of rural area.
