The tree is a symbol of essence of Life Paradigm. In this regard, Gabr and Dorrah have recently introduced a new symbolic-based flow aggregation and disaggregation modular approach for man-made and natural tree-shaped networks spread in all sciences and disciplines with emphasis to Engineering/technology and Science of Botany. The analysis has shown that these networks are formed from a separate or joint feet/head aggregation networks or head’/feet’ disaggregation networks. The study also highlighted that such modeling will provide an effective tool for establishing "open gates" for crossing the boundaries between various sciences. The objective of this paper will be three folds. The first objective is to build two general paradigms for the symbolic-based analogies between various flow aggregation and disaggregation tree-shaped networks between various sciences. The second objective is to extend and implement the suggested paradigms of crossing the boundaries between sciences as a whole incorporating water science for both feet/head aggregation water basins and head'/feet' disaggregation tree-shaped irrigation networks. The third objective is to commence in building morphological and topological features categorization systems including some selected shapes of considered sciences. Three tree-shaped morphological-based bifurcation ratios are considered based on the total number of branches per order, the total sum of lengths of branches per order and the total basin area (or volume) of branches sub-areas (sub-volumes) per order. It is shown that the inherited heredity features of natural tree-shaped networks in various sciences could be easily captured through appropriate network morphological analysis. The results could be used for testing their heredity similarity and matching with other natural trees groups through newly defined Heredity Factors and Heredity Index. Finally, the first Heredity Index map is successfully delineated for a group of 8 natural tree-shaped watersheds networks demonstrating the applicability and effectiveness of the suggested heredity similarity testing approach.
