Heart disease is one of the leading causes of death. Among patients with cardiovascular diseases, myocardial infarction (MI) is the main reason. Precise and timely identification of MI is significant for early treatment. Myocardial contrast echocardiography (MCE) is widely used for the detection of MI in clinic practice. However, existing clinical exam using MCE is subjective and highly operator dependent and time-consuming. Hence an automatic computer-aided MI detection in MCE is necessary to improve the diagnosis performance and decrease the workload of clinicians.
In this study, a novel deep learning model, polar residual network (PResNet) is proposed to identify MI regions in MCE images which design a polar layer considering the ring shape of the myocardium. MCE images are fed into the PResNet and a newly defined polar layer is used to describe the myocardium with a ring shape. The whole polar images are evenly divided into several subsections and a residual network is improved to classify the subsection into normal and abnormal categories. Finally, the detection results are mapped back to the original image to illustrate the infarction regions’ locations for the further process.
To evaluate the proposed PResNet, a dataset is constructed via performing MCE on five mice, which underwent the left anterior descending artery ligation and receive erythropoietin or saline injection, and the area variation fraction is manually annotated by an experienced expert as golden standards. The results demonstrate that the proposed PResNet model accomplishes high classification precisions with 99.6% and 98.7%, and 0.999 and 0.996 of AUC (area under the receiver operator curve) values on two different testing sets, respectively. Results suggest that the proposed model could enable accurate infarct detection and diagnosis of the MCE images.
Those efficiency gains highlight the powerful ability to describe and interpret the MCE images using the polar layer and residual network. The proposed PResNet might aid the clinicians in fast and accurate assessing the infarcted myocardium on MCE.
