The decision-making process demands data for analysis to obtain information on which the choice is made. Using good quality data is crucial, and obtaining it may be challenging, especially in a short time from many sources. Such a problem appears in a sample case of recruitment, where different abilities of many candidates must be verified. The problem is how to examine people for their skills and knowledge during the process of recruitment. This particular research was investigating the computer skills of potential employees. It can be easily used also for other procedures like periodic employee assessment or other performance tests. All of that is necessary to support proper decision making in HR. What is more, that is not only a problem associated with the mentioned department. It can also be met in other situations, where many people should be rapidly questionnaired, to obtain data, and prepare the analysis on the given subject.
The research aimed to design a complete diagnostic tool, to support and automatize the testing process and also support decisionmaking in that area. The automation applies to all stages, from exam preparation, throughout single test management and testing itself, up to final result and analysis. In this particular research, the problem was how to examine a large number of current or future employees to check their computer skills. The examination was based on the Polish Integrated Qualifications System and qualification for the basic level of computer skills certificate [1]. The solution, which came up as the result of the research, is an ICT tool for rapid preliminary testing and diagnostic. The tool is an author's system, that may be used for a preliminary test before the official exam, as well as for a rapid diagnostic tool to check skills and knowledge coverage and eventual gaps. As a result of a short automatic testing procedure, a complete analysis of examined person is prepared. That is essential informationthat may support the decision-making processes both in HR, or other areas.
