Background and Objective: Brain-computer interfaces build a communication pathway from the human brain to a computer. Motor imagery-based electroencephalogram (EEG) classification is a widely applied paradigm in brain-computer interfaces. The common spatial pattern, based on the event-related desynchronization (ERD)/event-related synchronization (ERS) phenomenon, is one of the most popular algorithms for motor imagery-based EEG classification. Moreover, the spatiotemporal discrepancy feature based on the event-related potential phenomenon has been demonstrated to provide complementary information to ERD/ERS-based features. In this paper, aiming to improve the performance of motor imagery-based EEG classification in a few-channel situation, an ensemble support vector learning (ESVL)-based approach is proposed to combine the advantages of the ERD/ERS-based features and the event-related potential-based features in motor imagery-based EEG classification.
Methods: ESVL is an ensemble learning algorithm based on support vector machine classifier. Specifically, the decision boundary with the largest interclass margin is obtained using the support vector machine algorithm, and the distances between sample points and the decision boundary are mapped to posterior probabilities. The probabilities obtained from different support vector machine classifiers are combined to make prediction. Thus, ESVL leverages the advantages of multiple trained support vector machine classifiers and makes a better prediction based on the posterior probabilities. The class discrepancy-guided sub-band-based common spatial pattern and the spatiotemporal discrepancy feature are applied to extract discriminative features, and then, the extracted features are used to train the ESVL classifier and make predictions.
Results: The BCI Competition IV datasets 2a and 2b are employed to evaluate the performance of the proposed ESVL algorithm. Experimental comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods are performed, and the proposed ESVL-based approach achieves an average max kappa value of 0.60 and 0.71 on BCI Competition IV datasets 2a and 2b respectively. The results show that the proposed ESVL-based approach improves the performance of motor imagery-based brain-computer interfaces.
Conclusion: The proposed ESVL classifier could use the posterior probabilities to realize ensemble learning and the ESVL-based motor imagery classification approach takes advantage of the merits of ERD/ERS based feature and event-related potential based feature to improve the experimental performance.
