Standard computer input devices such as a mouse or a keyboard are not well suited to the needs of users with severe motor disabilities in their interaction with standard computer interfaces. The emergence of contemporary human computer interfaces has allowed for the development of innovative solutions for hands-free Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), which can improve the quality and accessibility of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for motor-impaired users. The objectives of this study were to design, develop and evaluate a solution for a hands-free HCI, based on the Emotiv EPOC+ device, which, among other capabilities, also enables controlling the computer with facial expressions and motion sensors. Ten non-disabled adults and eight adults with a severe motor disability participated in an experiment to evaluate the proposed HCI solution. Eighteen users completed six experimental tasks successfully using both their existing computer use approach as well as the proposed hands-free computer use approach. The times necessary to complete the tasks were measured and analyzed, along with users’ subjective observations about the difficulty level of both computer use approaches. Users’ perceptions about the new hands-free computer use approach were assessed as well. Although there were no significant differences in both user types regarding the difficulty level in completing the tasks, disabled users solved the tasks with less effort. Positive perceptions about perceived usefulness, ease of use, appropriateness of the technology, and satisfaction with the proposed solution for touchless interaction were assessed for both user types. Scores were significantly higher for disabled users in the case of measuring the perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and satisfaction with the solution. This study showed that users with severe motor difficulties find new HCI less challenging compared to their existing computer use approach than the non-disabled who use standard HCI. When compared with non-disabled users, the disabled ones can be equally effective when confronted with a new HCI technology. Future work is needed to improve the proposed solution and to analyze the impact of different factors on users with motor disabilities and their adoption of an innovative technology for touchless interaction with a computer.
