An accurate prediction in the soft tissue changes is of great importance for orthodontic treatment planning. Previous studies on the accuracy of the Dolphin visual treatment objective (VTO) in predicting treatment results were mainly focused on orthognathic treatment. The accuracy of Dolphin VTO prediction for orthodontic treatment is, however, poorly understood. The aim of this study was to evaluate the accuracy of Dolphin VTO prediction in soft tissue changes after orthodontic treatment by comparing the changes between predicted and actual values.
A total of 157 patients were screened for eligibility, and 34 young adult patients (8 males, 26 females; mean age 24.8 ± 3.9 years) were finally included in the study based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The landmarks and parameters of the Holdaway soft tissue analysis were used for the cephalometric analyses. The cephalometric tracings of the actual treatment result and the Dolphin predicted treatment outcome were superimposed to calculate the prediction errors. Paired t test was used to compare the statistical differences between the predicted and actual treatment outcomes of the parameters used in the Holdaway soft tissue analysis.
There were significant differences between the predicted and actual values in parameters of the Holdaway soft tissue analysis (P < 0.05). The prediction of the landmarks in the lips region (ie, subnasale, soft tissue A-point, upper lip, lower lip, and soft tissue B-point) was inclined to be overestimated horizontally and underestimated vertically, whereas the prediction of the landmarks belonging to the chin region (ie, soft tissue pogonion, soft tissue gnathion, and soft tissue menton) was inclined to be underestimated horizontally and overestimated vertically. The most accurate prediction was found in the soft tissue A-point, whereas the least accurate one was found in the soft tissue in the chin region. The prediction was relatively more accurate in the vertical direction than in the horizontal direction.
The Dolphin VTO prediction in soft tissue changes after the orthodontic treatment in patients with bimaxillary protrusion is the most accurate for the soft tissue A-point and the least accurate for the soft tissue chin region.
