While shifting from one outcome based educational system to another one, a student needs to gain the benefit of credits transfer for all or most of his/her attained credits, followed by the policy and procedure of the granting institutions. Transfer of attained credits for a relocating student is quite normal and obvious in an outcome based higher educational system. With equal importance to transfer of credits, it is also vital to confirm that the knowledge and competency gained by the student does map the core skills needed for further progress in his/her education, in the receiving institution. In context to the field of Computer Science or Information Technology or any other related technical area, where programming languages and software platforms are imperative, the normal method of credits transfer could be a critical concern. On one hand, while the receiving institutions provide the transfer of credits for all or most of the courses successfully completed by a student, it is also a major concern whether the student occupies the core knowledge, competencies and skills needed to proceed with higher level courses, specific to software platforms or other specific requirements, in the receiving institution. This is because different institutions provide different curriculum for a similar program and thus, though the concepts may remain in general, the core software platforms or course related specific requirements may differ. In this case, with varying platforms from institution to institution, if a student is being received with transfer of credits but with lack of relevant knowledge, competencies and skills, he/she would face a critical challenge to cope up with the higher-level course, to succeed in the program. The competition within the institution may not allow the student to progress smoothly and could develop a sense of criticality or failure. With much needed effective solution to this problem, in our research, we have discussed the backdrops of normally executed credits transfer, addressed its complications as well repercussions and proposed a knowledge-based information system that would effectively tackle this problem. The outcome of the conducted research proposes to create a prototype of an information system tool to be identified as Knowledge Management Credit Transfer System in order to manage an efficient credits transfer process.
