Understanding the impact of Level of Information and Communication Technology Use, computer self-efficacy and perceived product usability of healthcare professionals regarding an alcohol consumption reduction website on facilitated access defined as referring patients to the webpage.
52 nurses and 41 general practitioners were assessed before patient recruitment started, using a questionnaire designed to assess socio-demographic characteristics, professional engagement to the website, Level of Information and Communication Technology Use, Computer self-efficacy (“the judgment of one’s capability to use a computer”) and Perceived product usability (“the extent to which a product can be used by specified users to achieve specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction in a specified context of use”). Dependent variable was the self-report of number of brochures distributed to patients.
Professionals’ engagement with facilitated access measured by brochures handed out was not predicted by Perceived product usability, Level of Information and Communication Technology Use or Computer self-efficacy. Professionals who had actively engaged with the website (customization) provided significantly more brochures compared with those who had not (Coefficient B 15.7 CI95% 3.5–27.8). Professional’s socio-demographic characteristics did not predict engagement in facilitated access.
Professionals’ Perceived product usability, Level of Information and Communication Technology Use and Computer self-efficacy were not associated to facilitated access. Active early engagement of health professionals with the website (customization) is a key predictor of subsequent engagement with facilitated access.
Computer Self-Efficacy, Level of Information and Communication Technology Use and Perceived Product Usability are irrelevant for facilitated access and efforts should be focused on taking time to collaborate with providers and convincing them about the usefulness of the intervention (including customization). Website customization by health care professionals is a promising predictor of engagement.
