To determine the history of malpractice literature using forensic science based on a bibliometric and graph theory.
Documented data were retrieved from the Web of Science Core Collection of Clarivate Analytics on February 22, 2019. We selected articles for the years 1975–2018 from among documents concerning malpractice in the “Medicine, Legal” section and the Science Citation Index Expanded and the Social Sciences Citation Index. Descriptive statistics and co-occurrence analyses were performed using Microsoft Excel 2016, Gephi 0.9.2, and VOSviewer 1.6.10 software.
In all, 379 papers and 3160 citing articles were retrieved. The most active publication year was 2013. Relative growth rate showed no malpractice explosion during the study period. Full articles comprised 83.11% of all papers. There were marked differences between the number of publications during the first 21 years and the last 23 years. More studies were published in the United States than in other countries and regions, but malpractice research has diminished during the most recent 3 years. Journal of Law, Medicine and Ethics contributed the most to the field, with 51 documents. The journal with the highest impact factor, however, was Forensic Science International: Genetics. B. Madea topped the list of authors with the highest number of documents. Three clusters were identified, led by authors C. Terranova, B. Madea, and T.A. Brennan, respectively. The malpractice topics that received the most attention were malpractice claims, the types of malpractice, and the causes of medical malpractice. Our study of the citing papers also provided interesting results.
This bibliometric analysis indicated that studying the field of medical malpractice was poor during 1975–2018. United States was the most prolific country, and B. Madea published more documents in the field. The studies in Medicine, Legal mostly focused on the claims, appraisement methods, and causes of medical malpractice. In the future, forensic scientists should pay more attention to medical malpractice.
