This review examined 29 empirical studies published in peer-reviewed journals from 2002 to 2017 that investigated the use of computers and information and communication technologies during writing instruction and related writing activities. Qualitative content analysis was employed to investigate how technology was used in the writing program, the impact of technology-mediated instruction on students' writing skills, and the barriers teachers faced in integrating technology into the writing curriculum. Results of the review demonstrated that computers and a range of digital technologies, applications, and web-based learning environments have been used to teach writing in K-12 educational settings. Technology-mediated writing instruction yielded improvements in students' composing processes and writing skills as well as their knowledge and use of new literacies. Students designed, produced, and presented a variety of multimodal and digital texts that represented their knowledge and understandings of literary material and contemporary social justice issues. The use of technology motivated student engagement and participation in writing assignments and increased social interaction and peer collaboration. Teachers faced a number of challenges in their efforts to integrate technology into the writing curriculum. Several recommendations are offered based on the results of this review. Relevant, high-quality teacher professional development on pedagogical uses of technology are urgently needed in order to promote technology-mediated writing instruction and build students' 21st century literacy skills. Institutional support is needed to ensure the availability of computers and appropriate applications in every classroom. Future research needs to identify how teachers can use multimedia and digital tools to improve writing instruction in the digital age, meet the objectives of the writing curriculum, and engage all students in the composing process. Continued exploration of how digital writing environments and online writing communities can support students’ competence as writers also is needed. Substantial investigative work is needed in the early childhood program.
