Medical simulation has become an essential educational tool in the curricula of healthcare professionals. A literature review revealed a knowledge gap in healthcare simulation education with respect to the technological expertise required to operate highly sophisticated simulation equipment. With this motivation, a case study was designed to determine if implementing on-site technological expertise allows for the facile navigation of high fidelity manikins. Next, a research study was conducted to evaluate engineering students understanding of simulation, and their interest to attend a program in medical simulation.
To determine if on-site technological expertise lifts barriers associated with manikin use and to assess levels of understanding and interest among engineering students following exposure to the technology used in healthcare simulation.
A prospective, descriptive study with pre-post surveys.
The Nursing Skills and Simulation Center at a New England University campus.
Engineering students attending 6 different engineering programs (Computer Science, Computer Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Biomedical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Technology Management) and having different educational levels (undergraduate and graduate).
Two assessments were applied to engineering students attending a class on technology used in healthcare simulation. A pre-test measured the understanding and interest of students in the engineering/computer science courses before attending a simulation class. A post-test assessment measured their improvement in understanding and interest to learn more about simulation technologies.
Statistical analysis and comparisons of pre-and post-test assessments show a 23% gain in understanding of this field following exposure to the healthcare simulation class. Furthermore, post test results show greater than 67% of those surveyed have an interest in attending a program in healthcare simulation.
The results indicate the collaboration of nursing and engineering has lifted known barriers to simulation education, and reveal engineering students have an interest in the field of medical simulation.
