The objective of this work is to design, implement and introduce the application of 32-channel system in the biomedical field. The main aim is to introduce the system application at homes in a domestic scale.
This research article covers the use of the 32-channel cost effective data acquisition device and its application software for the patient monitoring system. The design process includes knitting the sensors in the fiber to create a wearable fabric that can be fitted on a body for monitoring purposes.
Human body temperature, oxygen level around the body, ECG, EMG muscle signal and PH level detection using 32-channel system with LabVIEW front panel control for alarm triggering. The monitoring can be done remotely. Data is connected to the hospital server. All the graphical interface and simulation is created using LabVIEW. This application can be alternatively viewed as a Human Impact System.
Digilent Chip KIT max32 is used since it rooms enough channel required for the interface software. Sensors such as ECG, EMG, Oxygen Pulse, PH and temp are knitted in the fiber of clothes to introduce a wear able fabric. The total of 32-channel is used by the complete application. Some channels are used for alerting in case, if the values from the sensors are abnormal.
Chip KIT Shield for connecting sensors, attaching the output pins to the LED indicators and display have been created. Circuitry for measuring temperature, pulse, oxygen level, PH, EMG, and ECG have been designed and printed. This application can be used at home. For the wearer, the temperature level of different body parts, heart ECG level, muscle pulses signals, oxygen level around the body and the PH can be detected and displayed remotely from the LabVIEW front panel screen. The desired alarm level can be set from the front panel for every specific sensor. For this step, virtual channels can be created for allowing the user to set any random value for alarm depending on the patient age. These custom alarm levels are for user’s own record, while the hospital works with the standard levels. Once the sensor value passes through the alarm value, then the corresponding alarm will be triggered. There are two modes for alarm. One is automatic and other is manual. In the manual mode, user will set the alarm itself whereas in, automatic mode, the system will use the basic decision making techniques.
Combining the field of biomedical, computer science and electrical engineering, this is the first research of its own sort utilizing the 32-channel system.
