A renewed version of the computer code GAMOW (Vertse et al., 1982) is given in which the difficulties in calculating broad neutron resonances are amended. New types of phenomenological neutron potentials with strict finite range are built in. Landscape of the S-matrix can be generated on a given domain of the complex wave number plane and S-matrix poles in the domain are localized. Normalized Gamow wave functions and trajectories of given poles can be calculated optionally.1

Program Title: JOZSO
Program Files doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.17632/gh2rfnzn58.1

Licensing provisions: GPLv3
Programming language: Fortran 90
Supplementary material: A readme file: https://github.com/czylabsonasa/jozso

Nature of problem: The program calculates the poles of the partial wave S-matrix for spherically symmetric strictly finite range complex potentials. A few types of potential forms are built in and option for reading in external potential form is given. Landscape of the S-matrix on a given domain of the complex wave number plane can be calculated. Accurate position of the poles can be determined. Normalized Gamow wave functions and trajectories of given poles can be calculated optionally.
Solution method: Internal and external solutions satisfying boundary conditions in the origin and in the asymptotic region are generated by integrating the radial equation with adaptive step-size control for Runge–Kutta method. The difference of the logarithmic derivatives is calculated for a range of distances. The minimum of the summed modulus of the differences is searched using the Nelder–Mead algorithm. Pole trajectories and normalized Gamow functions can be calculated optionally.
Additional comments including Restrictions and Unusual features: The region of interest is restricted to the lower half of the wave number plane. Pole solutions from the upper half wave number plane can be safely computed by using the codes GAMOW [1] ANTI [2].
References:
[1] T. Vertse, K. F. Pál, Z. Balogh, Computer Physics Communications 27, 309 (1982).
[2] L.Gr. Ixaru, M. Rizea, T. Vertse, Computer Physics Communications 85, 217 (1995).
