Computational thinking (CT) is being consolidated as a key set of problem-solving skills that must be developed by the students to excel in our software-driven society. However, in psychological terms, CT is still a poorly defined construct, given that its nomological network has not been established yet. In a previous paper, we started to address this issue studying the correlations between CT and some fundamental cognitive variables, such as primary mental abilities and problem-solving ability. The current work deepens in the same direction as it aims to extend the nomological network of CT with non-cognitive factors, through the study of the correlations between CT, self-efficacy and the several dimensions from the ‘Big Five’ model of human personality: Openness to Experience, Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. To do so, the Computational Thinking Test (CTt) and some additional self-efficacy items are administered on a sample of 1251 Spanish students from 5th to 10th grade (N = 1251), and the Big Five Questionnaire-Children version (BFQ-C) is also taken by a subsample from the above (n = 99). Results show statistically significant correlations between CT and self-efficacy perception relative to CT performance (rs = 0.41), in which gender differences in favor of males are found (d = 0.42). Moreover, results show statistically significant correlations between CT and: Openness to Experience (r = 0.41), Extraversion (r = 0.30), and Conscientiousness (r = 0.27). These findings are consistent with the existing literature except for the unexpected correlation between CT and the Extraversion factor of personality, which is consequently discussed in detail. Overall, our findings corroborate the existence of a non-cognitive side of CT that should be taken into account by educational policies and interventions aimed at fostering CT. As a final contribution, the extended nomological network of CT integrating cognitive and non-cognitive variables is depicted.
