A recent new research has revealed that real life systems follow similar “fractals-general” stacking behavior during their change pathways when subjected to affecting environments and events “on and above” their normal behavior or set points. In this paper, the system change pathway is investigated through cleverly neutralizing time in the analysis. The new expression of “neutralizing time” is defined as time is not considered during the system stack-based change pathway calculations, but it will only be sensed in the sequence order. By adopting this concept, the formulations cleverly avoid falling in the trap of the long dilemma of “the problem of time” when handling the system change pathways. This is equivalent to representing the system by two-level configuration: the basic level of the physical system is considered as temporal, while the upper level of affecting events is regarded as non-temporal. Furthermore, it is shown that the infinite multi-stacking interactions at any event state of global systems could provide the necessary mathematical platform for analyzing the natural or intentionally induced “synchronicity” principle. Two illustrative examples are presented to demonstrate the successful applicability of the new time neutralized concept. The first example describes the course of life of inverted pendulum trolley car subject to accidents and collision influences. The second example elucidates the change pathway of the formation of human bladder spherical crystalline stone versus different change formulas under excessive salt/mineral concentrations influences. It is revealed that these illustrative examples could provide a positive assertive answer to the important question: “Can the presented change pathway theory through backward stacking, neutralized time effect, and satisfying the reversibility property mathematically uncover many open secrets such as the origins of matter and antimatter?”. Applications of the new concept to some real life single stacking and multi-stacking examples are also discussed. It is recommended that future work shall be directed toward strengthening the new concept for multi-stacking system change pathway platforms. Such recommendation could also be generalized for implementing the concept in retrospective or backward stacking way to various real life applications, such as for analyzing the past sequential (evolutionary) formation of matter/substances and uncovering the mysterious origins of many versatile systems.
