In recent years, an outstanding amount of interest has been given to reversible circuits. Their applications in distinctive fields that include digital circuit design with low-power consumption, computational circuit design in quantum computer and DNA-based computations are of high significance. Because of advantages of ternary circuits over binary circuits, such as reducing the complexity of interconnects, smaller chip area and reducing the number of quantum cells for the quantum circuit, ternary logic is suggested to construct new compact circuits. Also, in quantum technology, without any restrictions with the same physical phenomena that binary circuits are implemented, new circuits can be implemented in ternary logic. Circuit design for decimal calculations, which includes addition and subtraction of decimal numbers, has continually been the interest of digital circuit designers. In reversible ternary computation, the reversible circuits for decimal calculations have been less studied. In this paper, a reversible ternary adder/subtractor circuit for the addition/subtraction of decimal digits in radix three is proposed. Ternary Coded Decimal (TCD) codes are used to display decimal inputs and outputs. In circuit implementation, first by removing the unused inputs and outputs in the required ternary adders in the TCD Adder, three blocks of reversible 3-qutrit ternary adder with the quantum cost of 29, 22, 14 and constant inputs of 0, 1, and 0 were presented, then an optimal circuit for the TCD detector with a quantum cost of 16 was introduced. The proposed TCD detector has 23% improvement in quantum cost as compared to the existing design. By applying these in the design of the reversible TCD Adder, a more optimal reversible TCD Adder circuit than the existing design was presented resulting in a 31% improvement in quantum cost and 58% improvement in the number of constant inputs. Finally, decimal 9's complement circuit for the subtraction of two decimal numbers was proposed. In the proposed TCD Adder/Subtractor, the new proposed TCD Adder and decimal 9's complement circuits were used. To realize all proposed circuits, 1-qutrit shift gates and 2-qutrit Muthukrishnan-Stroud gates, which are realized in ion-trap technology in quantum computers, were used.
