The intrusion detection systems, firewalls and other security devices provide a guarantee for the safe operation of the network, but with the wide application of network, virus, hackers and other security incidents are increasing, these security devices will send tens of thousands of a warning in a very short period of time, the network management personnel is difficult to find useful information from these massive alarms. In addition, with the increasingly large scale network, mobile network, data management, data related to SMS, MMS message service system, single security device cannot detect all intrusions, so we must consider how to make these equipments work harmoniously. In this paper, based on the above problems, the mobile data network security integrated management system is studied, and the research and implementation of security event management mechanism is discussed in detail. The event management proposed in this paper can be regarded as an extension of the concept of network management, which enriches the content of the five functions of network management. In addition, the traditional network management and system management are two independent concepts. The two management systems can be combined together through the event management, so that the network security operation can be further improved. The purpose of security event modeling is to format the events from different event sources to facilitate subsequent processing. In this paper, the object oriented modeling method is adopted, which is scalable, and at the same time, the difference of all kinds of events is fully considered. For the description of the model, this paper uses the XML language, which is universal. Harm of computer virus on the network security management is more and more big, the characteristics of computer virus and the typical symptoms and its harmfulness are analyzed, and the security of mobile communication network is analyzed. The proposed system modification virus prevention. Implementation of general security management system in mobile data network is the focus of this article, mainly from the three aspects of the audit log management, security event monitor and account password management in the mobile data network involving multiple business systems in the implementation of integrated security management system. In this paper, we adopt rule based hierarchical system architecture, the coupling degree of each module is relatively loose, and it has great flexibility in the deployment.
