Environmental stress in the form of high temperature humidity index (THI) in tropical and sub-tropical region negatively affects semen quality and fertility of boar. Therefore, the present study was done to evaluate the effect of supplementing flaxseed oil (FLO) to boar’s diet on its semen quality, antioxidant status, fatty acid composition of seminal plasma and fertility under sub-tropical climate. For this purpose, six Hampshire crossbreed (50% Hampshire and 50% Gunghroo) boars were divided into two groups i.e control (CON) and treatment (FLO). In FLO and CON group, flaxseed and vegetable oil, respectively, was top dressed at the rate of 3% in basal diets for each boar on daily basis for 16 weeks during monsoon season. A total of 60 ejaculates, comprising 30 ejaculates from each group (ten ejaculates from each boar) were collected. Semen samples were evaluated for sperm quality parameters (SQPs: motility, viability, abnormality, acrosomal integrity and Hypo-osmotic swelling test) and velocity attributes by computer assisted semen analysis (CASA) at fresh and after 72 h of preservation at 17 °C. Antioxidant (glutathione peroxidase; GPx, catalase; CAT, total antioxidant capacity; TAC and malondialdehyde; MDA) were analyzed in seminal plasma and serum. Fatty acid compositions of seminal plasma were analyzed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). In-vivo fertility study was also conducted. Reaction time and false mounts were significantly (p < 0.05) reduced in FLO group as compared to CON group. Semen quality parameters were significantly (p < 0.05) improved at fresh stage and after 72 h of liquid storage in FLO group as compared to CON group. Velocity attributes (VAP, VSL, VCL, ALH, BCF and LIN) were significantly (p < 0.05) higher in FLO group. Flaxseed oil supplementation significantly (p < 0.01) enhanced serum GPx and CAT concentration. Serum and seminal plasma MDA concentration decreased significantly (p < 0.01) in FLO group. Similarly, GPx, TAC and CAT were significantly (p < 0.01) elevated in seminal plasma of FLO group. The study revealed that feeding of flaxseed oil altered the fatty acid composition of seminal plasma and significantly (p < 0.05) improved the farrowing rate. In summary, flaxseed oil supplementation improved the semen quality parameters and fertility of boars in sub-tropical climate by improving the antioxidant capacity and altering the fatty acid composition of seminal plasma.
